Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-024-18763-2

Cloud media video encoding: review and challenges
Wilmer Moina-Rivera1 · Miguel Garcia-Pineda1
Jose M. Alcaraz-Calero2

· Juan Gutiérrez-Aguado1

·

Received: 19 September 2023 / Revised: 29 December 2023 / Accepted: 24 February 2024 /
Published online: 9 March 2024
© The Author(s) 2024

Abstract
In recent years, Internet traffic patterns have been changing. Most of the traffic demand by end
users is multimedia, in particular, video streaming accounts for over 53%. This demand has
led to improved network infrastructures and computing architectures to meet the challenges
of delivering these multimedia services while maintaining an adequate quality of experience.
Focusing on the preparation and adequacy of multimedia content for broadcasting, Cloud and
Edge Computing infrastructures have been and will be crucial to offer high and ultra-high
definition multimedia content in live, real-time, or video-on-demand scenarios. For these
reasons, this review paper presents a detailed study of research papers related to encoding
and transcoding techniques in cloud computing environments. It begins by discussing the
evolution of streaming and the importance of the encoding process, with a focus on the latest
streaming methods and codecs. Then, it examines the role of cloud systems in multimedia
environments and provides details on the cloud infrastructure for media scenarios. After
doing a systematic literature review, we have been able to find 49 valid papers that meet the
requirements specified in the research questions. Each paper has been analyzed and classified
according to several criteria, besides to inspect their relevance. To conclude this review, we
have identified and elaborated on several challenges and open research issues associated
with the development of video codecs optimized for diverse factors within both cloud and
edge architectures. Additionally, we have discussed emerging challenges in designing new
cloud/edge architectures aimed at more efficient delivery of media traffic. This involves
investigating ways to improve the overall performance, reliability, and resource utilization of
architectures that support the transmission of multimedia content over both cloud and edge
computing environments ensuring a good quality of experience for the final user.
Keywords Cloud computing · Multimedia · Coding · Encoding · Transcoding · Review ·
Survey

Wilmer Moina-Rivera, Miguel Garcia-Pineda, Juan Gutiérrez-Aguado and Jose M. Alcaraz-Calero
contributed equally to this work.

B Miguel Garcia-Pineda

miguel.garcia-pineda@uv.es

Extended author information available on the last page of the article

123

81232

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

1 Introduction
Internet traffic has skyrocketed over the past year with the increase in many digital activities
due to the lockdowns and restrictions caused by the coronavirus pandemic. Teleworking,
streaming, video calls, and online shopping are some of the fastest growing activities, which
account for a large share of Internet traffic [1]. For example, in the first half of 2021, bandwidth
traffic was dominated by video streaming, representing 53.72% of the overall traffic, with
YouTube, Netflix, and Facebook video in the top three [2].
The multimedia sector is experiencing rapid growth as more businesses and organizations
turn to video and other multimedia content to communicate with their customers, employees,
and other stakeholders. To meet the increasing demand for multimedia content, businesses
need a flexible and scalable platform that can handle the large amounts of data and traffic
associated with streaming video and other multimedia [3]. The cloud provides an ideal
solution for this, as it offers a range of features that are well-suited to the needs of the
multimedia sector. Some key benefits of the cloud for the multimedia sector include:
• Pay-as-you-go pricing: Expenditure is based on the actual encoding time utilized, proving
to be a notably more economical alternative compared to the acquisition and maintenance
of on-premises encoding hardware and software.
• Scalability: Effortlessly adjust the amount of encoding power to align with fluctuating
needs. This flexibility is advantageous for variable workloads or when encoding substantial batches of video content.
• Reduced IT overhead: Eliminate concerns related to provisioning, managing, or maintaining on-premises encoding infrastructure. This liberation allows IT personnel to
concentrate on more strategic initiatives.
• Improved time to market: Accelerate the delivery of video content to the market through
cloud-based encoding. This is attributed to the absence of delays associated with the
provisioning or installation of hardware or software.
Overall, the power of the cloud makes it an attractive option for businesses in the multimedia sector looking to deliver high-quality content to their customers and users.
To achieve smooth and uninterrupted streaming playback, the technology used must be
designed to transmit a high data flow and prepared to support variations in the demand for
content. On the one hand, an elastic infrastructure based on Cloud Computing (CC) and
its evolution to modern Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) where the Cloud is extended to
the Edge of the network, allows the allocation of resources adapted to each need without
excessive or inadequate provisioning, automatically. On the other hand, by processing the
video, for instance, making different representations of the video for different devices or
network conditions, we have more control over the broadcast quality from the client side [4].
In terms of computational capabilities, it should be taken into account that the growing
importance of mobile devices such as smartphones or tablets often requires hardware capable
of multi-device streaming, i.e. offering different bitrates and resolutions depending on the
connected device, always with the ultimate goal of providing the best user experience.
The agility and elasticity of the Cloud and Edge make it possible to expand the capacity
depending on the demand or even scale up resources compared to the rigidity of infrastructures
not based on Cloud and MEC architectures.
Also, the relationship between cost and computational resources offered by Cloud and
MEC infrastructures, together with the possibility of paying only for the resources used,
avoiding overprovisioning problems, make these solutions the best option when it comes to
supporting all tasks required by streaming-based content delivery projects [5].

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81233

In conclusion, concerning the economic ramifications of employing cloud services for
video encoding, it can be affirmed that cloud video encoding constitutes a cost-effective
and efficient method for encoding video content for delivery across diverse devices [6].
The particular economic advantages associated with the utilization of cloud video encoding
encompass diminished capital expenditures (CAPEX), as there is no requisite investment
in costly on-premises encoding hardware or software. Similarly, operational expenditures
(OPEX) are curtailed, as the expenditure is incurred solely for the actual encoding time
utilized, proving to be more economical than the continual maintenance costs associated with
on-premises encoding infrastructure. Ultimately, these economies contribute to an enhanced
return on investment (ROI). Cloud video encoding serves as a strategic means to augment
ROI by mitigating overall video encoding expenses and expediting the market entry of video
content.
Several review papers have explored the domain of multimedia cloud computing, yet
none have specifically delved into the intricacies of encoding and transcoding processes in
the cloud (see Section 3.1). Given their demand for substantial computational capacity, these
processes are relocated to the cloud to optimize costs. This review paper is uniquely dedicated
to this area due to the absence of comparable works. It explores a research frontier marked
by innovations in enhancing the quality of experience for end-users and optimizing resource
consumption to reduce the associated costs of these tasks.
The main goal of this paper is to carry out an exhaustive study of existing work related
to video encoding on cloud and MEC architectures. Through this study, the reader will be
provided with an analysis of the different published proposals that represent the current state
of the art of video encoding on the cloud. Each work has been classified according to the type
of cloud technology used, and according to the type of online video delivery. Besides, an
analysis of the codecs used in each paper is carried out. Finally, an analysis of the challenges
that researchers and industry will have to face to offer high-quality streaming services will
be presented.
This can be a useful overview for researchers and practitioners who are not familiar with
the topic, or who want to get up to speed quickly on the latest research. The reader can identify
gaps in the current research that could suggest new directions for future research. This can
be helpful for researchers who are planning their studies and want to know where there are
opportunities to contribute new knowledge to the multimedia cloud. Moreover, it can be a
good source of references for researchers who are looking for additional reading material on
cloud-based video streaming and video encoding/transcoding over cloud/edge computing.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a brief overview of video
encoding over the cloud and edge architectures, and the main motivations to converge these
two paradigms. Section 3 details the systematic literature review technique carried on to select
the papers analyzed in Section 4. An exhaustive review of each selected article is provided
in Section 4. All of them have been classified according to the type of technology and online
video delivery used. An analysis of the relevance of the selected papers has been carried out
according to the number of references received. In addition, future research directions are
outlined in Section 5. Finally, we present the conclusions of this research work in Section 6.

2 State of the art
This section first provides a brief overview of video encoding, cloud and edge architectures,
and the main motivations to converge these two paradigms. Then, a brief overview of relevant
literature reviews and surveys in this domain is presented.

123

81234

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

The section is divided into three subsections. First, we will discuss the evolution of streaming with a special focus on the latest streaming methods and the importance of encoding
processes in today’s streaming systems. Second, we will analyze the importance of cloud
systems in multimedia environments and we will detail the architecture of the infrastructure
used today to provide streaming services over the cloud. Third, we will analyze other existing
surveys and tutorials on similar topics to allow the reader to differentiate how this manuscript
goes a step forward in the state of the art.

2.1 Media streaming: focusing on encoding process
Streaming systems have evolved over the years as technology and network connections have
improved. From the first streaming systems in the 90s to the current streaming systems, like
YouTube or Twitch, all the technologies associated with these systems have significantly
evolved. Two clear examples that will be discussed in this subsection are: a) streaming
protocols and b) video encoding systems.
In the case of streaming protocols, the main ones worth to be discussed are:
• Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) and Real-time Transport Control Protocol (RTCP)
are described in RFC 3550 [7]. Both of them work over User Datagram Procotol (UDP).
This means that the protocol should support by design packet losses as it is not guaranteed
that packets will reach their destination. While RTP transports media streams (e.g., audio
and video), RTCP is used to monitor transmission statistics and quality of service (QoS)
and assists in the synchronization of multiple streams. Over the years, both protocols have
been considered the main standard for real-time multimedia streaming in IP networks.
• Real-Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP) is defined in RFC 7826 [8]. RTSP is an
application-level protocol, similar to Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) in terms of
operation and syntax, but its goal is to transfer media data in real-time. It is used to
establish and control media sessions between endpoints. Therefore, RTSP is a control
channel protocol between the media client and the media server, while the multimedia
stream is sent by RTP.
• Real-Time Messaging Protocol (RTMP) is an application-level protocol designed for
multiplexing and packetizing multimedia transport streams (such as audio, video, and
interactive content) over a suitable transport control protocol (TCP), see [9]. To deliver
streams smoothly and transmit as much information as possible, it splits streams into
fragments, and their size is negotiated dynamically between the client and server.
After looking at some of the most commonly used streaming protocols, there are some
drawbacks to be considered. Currently, most content on the Internet is served to customers
through content delivery networks (CDN) and most of them do not support RTP/RTCP.
However, some work has continued to rely on the promotion of RTP for video delivery, in
particular in the context of Web Real-Time Communication (WebRTC) [10, 11] and [12]. This
framework was born in 2011 as another technological alternative for real-time transmissions.
WebRTC is a collection of W3C and IETF standards that allows the transmission of content
in real time between users, with an end-to-end latency of less than half a second.
Streaming video over HTTP has evolved over time. Initially, progressive download was
used, where the video was downloaded and played simultaneously. However, this method
had limitations in terms of playback control, as users could only watch the portion of the
video that had already been downloaded. HTTP Pseudo-streaming emerged as an evolution
of this approach, aiming to simulate on-demand streaming with the added benefit of forward

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81235

and rewind playback capabilities. This method allows users to navigate through the video
without downloading the entire file. However, it requires specific implementations on both
the client and server sides.
Nowadays, HTTP Adaptive Streaming (HAS) is the number one video technology for
most video streaming platforms. In HAS, see Fig. 1, a video is divided into smaller segments,
and each segment, st , is encoded at several resolutions and bit rates, thus creating several
representations, r j . Each player runs an Adaptive Bitrate (ABR) algorithm to select the
most suitable segment to create a seamless playout; the work developed by [13] describes
a classification of some of the client-side adaptation techniques (Throughput-Based ABR,
Buffer-Based ABR, and Hybrid/Control Theory-Based ABR). There are several HAS format
specifications, but the most commonly used are HTTP Live Streaming (HLS) and Dynamic
Adaptive Streaming over HTTP (DASH) [14]. These streaming systems require efficient
video encoding systems to deliver content in as many resolutions as possible. In addition, to
offer the highest possible quality of experience (QoE) [15].
Video encoding has been improved for years, but the increase in device resolutions and/or
new types of content requires new codecs with greater compression capacity and minimal
quality loss. When developing a codec, not only the final quality is important, but also its
performance, resource consumption, encoding time, and final size.
H.264 [16], also known as Advanced Video Coding (AVC), is the most widely used codec
for all types of transmissions. It was created in 2003 and was intended to replace the traditional
MPEG-4, being named MPEG-4 AVC. This format is currently used for Blu-Ray movies,
streaming services, satellite broadcasting, and even digital terrestrial television. However,
with the new video resolutions of 4K and 8K, it was observed that H.264 required a large
bandwidth. Therefore, new codecs were needed to lower the bitrate of this type of video
while maintaining quality. As a result, H.265 and VP9 were born.
The H.265 codec [17], also known as High-Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC), was jointly
developed by the Video Coding Experts Group (VCEG) and the Moving Picture Experts
Group (MPEG) in 2013. It is a royalty-bearing standard, so it requires hardware manufacturers
to pay a license fee to add support, and developers to pay a fee to implement it. The bandwidth
required for video transmission is reduced by almost half compared to H.264 without loss
of quality. Consider also that H.265 can support resolutions of up to 8 K UHD (8192x4320)
and a frame rate of up to 300 fps.
VP9 [18] is the open-source alternative of H.265 and it is royalty-free and developed by
Google as the successor to VP8. It was born in 2013 and has had a great impact due to Google’s
large deployment of its YouTube service and Android operating system. The design goals
for VP9 included reducing the bit rate by 50% compared to VP8 while maintaining the same
video quality, and aiming for better compression efficiency than the MPEG HEVC standard.

Request(st,ri)

Rate adaptation
heuristic

Video
Segmentation

Buffer
Internet

Video
encoding

HAS Server

v(st,ri)

HAS Client

Video
decoding

Fig. 1 HTTP Adaptive Streaming (HAS)

123

81236

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

VP9 is well suited for video resolutions greater than 1080p until 8 K with a maximum rate
of 120 fps.
AV1 was developed to improve VP9. The stable version of the AV1 encoder was released
in March 2018 [19]. This is an open, royalty-free video compression format developed by the
Alliance for Open Media (AOMedia), a consortium of the most important companies related
to the Internet and streaming. This encoder has a compression capacity of more than 30%
compared to its predecessors (VP9 and H.265) [20].
AV1, as its predecessors, is a traditional block-based frequency transform format featuring
new techniques. Frame content is divided into adjacent same-sized blocks called superblocks
(similar to macroblock). Superblocks are square-shaped and they can either be of size 128 ×
128 or 64 × 64 pixels, but these superblocks can be divided into smaller blocks until 4 × 4
blocks. AV1 introduces the concept of T-shaped and can divide a superblock into horizontal
or vertical splits into four stripes of 4:1 and 1:4 aspect ratio. It expands on non-directional
intra-modes by adding 3 new smooth predictors. Moreover, AV1 extends the number of
references for each frame from 3 in VP9 to 7.
H.266/VVC, Versatile Video Coding (VVC), [21] is the latest encoding standard offering
50% more compression compared to H.265/HEVC. It increases the block size in the temporal
model to 128×128 with binary or ternary partitioned blocks compared to HEVC’s quaternary
partitioning. It allows different partitioning for the luminance and chrominance planes and
enables hardware acceleration through parallel processing. For intra-frame prediction, 67
prediction modes are used instead of the 33 used in HEVC, in addition to enabling the use
of rectangular blocks. Inter-frame prediction allows prediction from two reference images,
as well as increasing the degrees of freedom of the motion vectors from 2 to 3 dimensions.
So far, the evolution of codecs has always been similar. Quality is improved while maintaining or reducing bitrate at the cost of having encoders that require higher computational
capacity. But, what happens if these next-generation encoders want to run on Edge or IoT
devices? For this purpose, MPEG/ISO has developed the MPEG-5 Part 2 LCEVC (Low
Complexity Enhancement Video Coding) standard [22]. MPEG-5 Part 2 LCEVC is the first
internationally accredited enhancement standard for any existing and future video compression scheme. It improves the compression performance of any basic video codec (e.g. AVC,
HEVC, AV1, or VVC) and offers improved picture quality with up to 40% lower bit rate for
both live and video-on-demand (VoD) transmission.
Figure 2 depicts the current status of the most important codecs H.264, H.265, VP9, AV1,
and VVC by carrying out a small comparison among them based on the following four
features (see [23] and [24]):
• Encoding Performance: Time to encode a video with similar encoding parameters.
• Decoding Performance: Speed for a given bitstream when played back on an end device.
• Compression efficiency: Subjective and objective quality measures for a given bitrate.
• Ecosystem adoption: Degree of implementation and updating of encoders and decoders.

2.2 Multimedia cloud and mobile edge computing architectures
Today’s Over-The-Top (OTT) services require an agile infrastructure to scale instantly and
cope with large fluctuations in demand of these services. Cloud and Mobile Edge Computing
help streaming services to solve these challenges. Cloud computing has been an evolution of
the usage of virtualization to offer a service provider architecture that can be used simultaneously by multiple customers (tenants). Mobile Edge computing has been the evolution of

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81237

Encoding Performance

Compression Efficiency

Higth

Low

Decoding Performance

Ecosystem Adoption

Fig. 2 Current status of codecs: a small comparision

Cloud infrastructure to cover not only the data center network segment but also the last mile
close to the final customers.
Multimedia cloud and edge computing share similarities with general-purpose cloud computing [4], but they face additional challenges due to the diversity of multimedia services
and the heterogeneity of devices. To effectively support multimedia applications, the infrastructure needs to adapt to various devices in terms of their processing capabilities and to
provide QoS guarantees. Two approaches can be employed to achieve QoS provisioning:
adding QoS capabilities to the existing infrastructure or introducing a QoS middleware layer.
For example, [25] proposes a middleware application layer solution to increase the reliability and flexibility of the network for real-time multimedia applications using scalable video
encoding (H.264/SVC).
In essence, the high demands of multimedia data on the Internet could clog a generalpurpose cloud/Edge architecture if it has not been properly empowered with support for
multimedia capabilities. Today’s cloud and Edge architecture have mostly concentrated on
providing compute and storage resources. Now, such architectures are being enhanced including techniques and improvements to reach QoS requirements such as increasing bandwidth,
minimizing latency, and jitter, etc., and providing novel mechanisms to achieve QoS requirements such as network slicing [26].
Regardless of the IT infrastructure used, streaming processes can be divided into 4 steps
(see Fig. 3). In the Capture Zone, two tasks can be performed depending on the type of
streaming (VoD or live). In the case of VoD, this is where the tasks of content creation and
production would be performed. These tasks are performed with raw or very high-quality
videos in order not to lose image quality. For live systems, this area performs the ingestion of
multimedia content coming from broadcast mobile units and also the production, to select the
camera and generate a single stream, in real-time. In both scenarios, the multimedia stream
in ultra-high quality is sent to the next step (Video Processing Zone). An example of how

123

81238

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278
Capture Zone
On-Set / Near-Set

Video Processing Zone
Video coding

/

Video transcoding

Video configurations:
Codecs:

Camera media

Segmentation:

AVC

Fixed

Constant

Variable

Variable

VP9
AV1

Playback
Zone

CDN

MPEG-DASH

Caches

RTMP/HDS

Edge Computing

SMOOTH

Bitrate:

HVEC

VVC

Storage
Zone

Resolution:
Standard

High definition

Full HD

4K and higher

Load Balancers

HLS
WebRTC
RTSP/RTP

Raw camera media

Collect camera media

Cloud Computing

MPEG-TS

Multiples representation by media

Software-Based Media Server,
Transcoder, DRM, DVR
Deploymed on Premises or in
Cloud
Complete Server-Level Control
REST API
Highly Abstracted Architecture
Specialist hardware

Multi-Cloud, MultiCDN
Automatic scaling
to any size
audience.

Multiple OTT devices
playback for the
live/demand stream
supported on multiples
devices and browsers.

Fig. 3 Multimedia cloud and edge computing architecture

Netflix delivers cloud-based technology and infrastructure to help production crews create
and exchange media during production and post-production stages can be seen in [27].
In the Video Processing Zone, encoding and transcoding tasks are performed according
to the type of stream coming from the Capture Zone. The encodings can be performed for
different codecs (AVC, HEVC, VP9, AV1, etc.), for different bit rates, different resolutions,
etc. All this is designed for the type of streaming protocol to be used (e.g. DASH or HLS).
These processes must be carried out in parallel in order to reduce the delay and be able to
offer all versions of the content to the end-user and thus improve the perceived quality.
The Storage Zone is key to offering a good service to the end user. Today’s cloud systems
have distributed storage systems to bring content closer to users. CDN architectures can also
be used to offer multimedia content with a reduced delay and without saturating the main
content servers, specially making use of the advantage of the Edge infrastructures that allow
proactive dynamic allocation of content geographically sited in the last mile to the final user
and thus reducing significantly the latency required for the delivery.
Finally, the Playback Zone has to be adapted and compatible with the transmission
protocols (DASH, HLS, RTSP, RTP, etc.). According to the type of transmission, protocol,
or device, the users in this zone must use a specific type of application to access the video
content. As was mentioned in Section 2.1, for instance, in a transmission using HAS, the
client application controls the ABR algorithm by requesting video bit rates based on observed
network conditions and device resolution, thereby regulating the rate of transmission between
the client and the server [13].
Following the architecture shown in Fig. 3, nowadays several Cloud Service Providers
(CSPs) like Azure, Amazon Web Services (AWS), Google Cloud, and Alibaba Cloud, offer
video encoding services. These services are designed to handle the encoding of video content
for streaming and broadcasting over the Internet. Below is a brief description of the services
offered by these CSPs related to video encoding.
• Azure Media Services Encoding1 : Azure Media Services offers highly secure encoding
workflows suitable for web developers, broadcasters, and studios. It allows users to define
their own encoding workflows using tools like Azure Media Explorer and a graphical
1 Microsoft Azure: Services available at: https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/media-services/encoding

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81239

Workflow Designer. The service supports a wide range of input file formats and provides
standard MP4 multi-bitrate files to save on storage costs. Azure Media Services also
offers on-the-fly conversion to various streaming protocols such as MPEG-DASH, Apple
HLS, and Microsoft Smooth Streaming, with the option to add encryption dynamically.
Adaptive bitrate streaming is used to enhance the viewer experience by adjusting video
playback quality based on the user’s connection speed.
• Amazon Elastic Transcoder and AWS Elemental MediaConvert2 : Amazon offers two services: Amazon Elastic Transcoder and AWS Elemental MediaConvert. Amazon Elastic
Transcoder is designed to be a highly scalable and cost-effective service for developers
and businesses to transcode media files. It supports a wide range of devices and formats,
including segmented files and playlists for HLS, Smooth, or MPEG-DASH streaming.
AWS Elemental MediaConvert is a more advanced file-based video transcoding service
with a comprehensive suite of features. It offers on-demand pricing and is designed to
scale seamlessly with the user’s needs. AWS also provides Accelerated Transcoding,
which can significantly speed up the processing of file-based video encoding jobs.
• Google Cloud Transcoder API3 : Google Cloud’s Transcoder API allows users to submit,
monitor, and manage transcoding jobs within Google Cloud. It supports a variety of features, including content encryption for DRM, ad keyframe insertion, thumbnail creation,
and job templates for reusing configurations. The API is based on Google’s Identity and
Access Management for access control and supports a range of containers and encryption
schemes for different streaming protocols.
• Alibaba Cloud ApsaraVideo Media Processing (MPS)4 : Alibaba Cloud’s ApsaraVideo
Media Processing service supports all major formats and includes customizable transcoding services. It offers features like video encryption based on the AES128 algorithm, video
snapshot capabilities, transcoding templates, and workflows for automatic transcoding
after media uploads. The service also provides various features such as video editing,
merging, snapshot capture, and watermarking, with the ability to create custom transcoding parameters.
Each of these services offers a unique set of features and pricing models, and the choice
between them would typically depend on the specific requirements of the encoding workflow, the desired output formats, the level of control and customization needed, as well as
integration with other cloud services and APIs.

2.3 Related work
In this subsection we are going to present other reviews or surveys related to Multimedia
Cloud Computing (MCC) previously published, paying special attention to the differences
between these previous papers and our review.
The paper [4] introduces the principal concepts of multimedia cloud computing. The
authors approached multimedia cloud computing from two perspectives: multimedia-aware
cloud and cloud-aware multimedia. They demonstrated how a multimedia-aware cloud may
provide QoS support, distributed parallel processing, storage, and load balancing for diverse
multimedia applications and services. They explored how cloud-computing resources might
2 Amazon AWS: Services available at: https://aws.amazon.com/es/mediaconvert/
3 Google Cloud: Service available at: https://cloud.google.com/transcoder/docs/concepts/overview?hl=es-

419
4 Alibaba Cloud: Services available at: https://www.alibabacloud.com/es/product/mts

123

81240

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

be best utilized by multimedia services and applications such as storage and sharing, authoring
and mash-up, adaptation and delivery, and rendering and retrieval.
In [28], the authors describe how to use mobile cloud computing to enable multimedia applications on mobile devices. They focus on the technical side and discuss existing
challenges and solutions from different perspectives. In this paper, the authors pay attention to showing customers’ energy consumption and how the cloud could help reduce it.
Potential challenges must take into account the quality of experience, security, and privacy.
[29] is another work that surveys the paradigm of cloud mobile media. This paper studies
this research area ranging from resource management and control, media platform services,
cloud systems, and applications. It is the only survey where the authors analyze the encoding/transcoding process in a subsection called “Media Representation” and where only seven
works are described.
Another overview related to multimedia cloud computing is [30]. In this paper, the authors
show an overview of the cloud storage system and its security problem. They describe several
key ideas and solutions for data integrity, data confidentiality, access control, and data manipulation. The authors conclude by saying that multimedia cloud storage security is still in its
infancy and they expect an important improvement shortly. For example, the authors of [31]
introduce the concept of multimedia protection based on role access control. They describe
the complete process of registration, role assignment, multimedia file owner’s request for
data encryption, and user login and access to multimedia files, which guarantees security in
multimedia files.
The main purpose of [32] is to present some dominant platforms, software packages,
application delivery tools, and architectures that might help a multimedia-related application
to be easily deployed, maintained, and scaled up in a cloud computing environment. A
specific case, based on AWS, is explained in [33]. This work analyzes how encoding or
pre-transcoding tasks require high computational capacity, which are brought to the cloud to
minimize costs. However, these transcoding tasks are the more computationally demanding
ones within the entire streaming pipeline.
Finally, there is another work [34], where the authors explore the latest advances in latencysensitive video computing in the cloud, which is essential for cloud-supported conversational
video services such as cloud gaming, Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR) and
telepresence. The authors take a top-down approach to cover the literature: from applications
and experiences to architecture and management to optimization in and out of the cloud.
They also point to major open challenges and hope to stimulate more research activities in
this new and exciting direction.
Summing up, there are several review papers related to the topic of multimedia cloud
computing, but none of them focus on the encoding and transcoding processes on the cloud.
These processes require high computational capacity, which is brought to the cloud to minimize costs. This review paper is specifically devoted to this topic because there is no similar
work and it is a research area with new improvements in the quality of experience for end
users and in resource consumption to reduce the costs of these tasks.

3 Research methodology
This study has employed the systematic literature review (SLR) technique proposed by
Kitchenham and Charters [35]. The goal is to define appropriate research questions and
look up relevant studies that are focused on them. The search is broken down into three

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81241

phases: planning the review, conducting the review, and reporting the results. These phases
are used to determine the status of the research area, as well as to evaluate contributions
and gaps for drawing partial conclusions for each research question and to build the general
conclusion of the report. In the next subsections, each phase will be described in further
detail.
Additionally, the guidelines by Petersen et al. [36] have been taken into account, in particular when classifying the study and identifying its research area. The research steps used
by Kitchenham and Charters [35] and Banijamali et al. [37] are shown in Fig. 4. For example, an additional pilot study was performed to examine possible search strings (similar to
Kitchenham and Charters [35]).

3.1 Identifying the need for the review
None of the reviews analyzed in subsection focus on the topic of video encoding proposals
over cloud infrastructures. To perform this review a systematic process of searching for and
evaluating primary sources on the topic at hand has been carried out. In this report, we provide
statistical data of the selected papers and a classification of them that can be later used in
other research projects to reach a sound understanding of the current state of the problem
being addressed.

Step 3 - Protocols development and
research questions definition.

Review protocol

Step 4 - Identification of research
(conducting search).

Retrieved
publications

Step 5 - Study selection.

Selected
primary studies

Step 6 - Data extraction - primary study
properties.

State of the art

Step 7 - Data extraction - primary study
quality assessment.

Paper ranking

Step 9 - Data analysis and synthesis
(deductive coding based on themes.

Step 10 - Reporting the review.

Classification
scheme RQ2, RQ3
& RQ4

Publication

DOCUMENTING

Step 8 - Data extraction - inductive coding.

CONDUCTING

Review scope
Step 2 - Pilot study.

PLANNING

Step 1 - Justification of the need for SLR
and definition of research goals.

Fig. 4 Systematic literature review steps

123

81242

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

3.2 Specifying the objective and research questions
To systematically identify the research purpose for this study, we used the Goal-QuestionMetric (GQM) technique [38]. A GQM goal is a measuring objective that has been formalized
in accordance with specific criteria [39], which are shown in Table 1.
The overall goal of this investigation is defined as follows:
Analysing the implementation of the existing cloud-based encoding designs for the purpose of their characterization regarding the type of cloud computing, the types of cloud
services, and the type of streaming from the viewpoint of the researcher in the context of
the convergence of video encoding/transcoding on cloud computing and MEC architectures.
As shown in Table 2, this objective was divided into 4 research questions and their rationales.

3.3 Definition of inclusion and exclusion criteria
We selected studies for inclusion in the literature review if they presented a scientific contribution to the body of knowledge on video encoding in the context of cloud and edge computing.
Specifically, we included scientific papers in the context of cloud/edge convergence and video
content preparation that meet all the following criteria:
1. implement a video encoding or transcoding system in the cloud,
2. define a video encoding or transcoding method,
3. if the proposal has been implemented and tested in a private, public or Federated cloud
environment, and
4. if the year of publication of the work is after 2010.
Accordingly, the following exclusion criteria were considered:
1. studies that concerned the preparation of video content, cloud computing, or grid computing, but not their convergence;
2. studies that dealt with topics other than video encoding or transcoding;
3. duplicate articles;
4. non-peer-reviewed studies, including introductions to special issues, calls for papers,
keynote speeches, prefaces, standards, patents, etc;
5. papers that are an extension of a previous paper or papers not written in English have
been excluded.

Table 1 Research objective
Analyse

the existing cloud-based encoding designs

For the purpose of

characterization

Regarding

the type of cloud computing architecture, types of cloud services, and type of
streaming

From the viewpoint of

the researcher

In the context of

the convergence of video encoding/transcoding on cloud computing and MEC
architectures.

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81243

Table 2 Research questions (RQs)
ID

Question

Rational

RQ1

Are there many papers on distributed

Analyze whether there are many works on the

video encoding in cloud environments?

topic and their relevance, due to the great
demand for this type of multimedia content.

RQ2
RQ3
RQ4
RQ5

What type of cloud architecture has

Identifying and synthesizing the architecture

been used to implement each solution?

or paradigm used in selected proposals.

What videos codecs has been used in

Identifying the video codecs used and the

the experiments presented in each paper?

number of codecs used by each paper.

Are the solutions intended for video

Identifying and structuring primary

on demand, live streaming, or both?

studies in terms of video streaming types.

How can video encoding systems evolve

Identify and argue the possible new

over the new paradigms of cloud computing?

challenges related to the topic, and where
new video encoding system solutions may be
heading in the coming years.

3.4 Definition of the search strategy (meta-analysis)
In the systematic literature review, identifying relevant studies that answer the research
questions is an important step [35]. Therefore, to develop and analyze the search strategy,
researchers use different guidelines or methods [40].
In this work, we have chosen to perform a progressive review of the information, applying
sequentially the automatic and snowball search methods according to the guidelines of [41].
To start the work, a pilot study was conducted to define the optimal search strategy that
would minimize noise and adequately retrieve relevant studies. The pilot study started by
defining a set of keywords with the following search string: (“cloud” OR “cloud-based”
OR “architecture”) AND (“video” OR “media” OR “multimedia”) AND (“coding” OR
“encoding” OR “transcoding”). The string selected by the authors to address the topics
related to the research is grouped into three elements with a certain degree of affinity and
each group is related to each other by the logical operator “AND”.
To objectively evaluate the search string, a search was performed in Google Scholar
where the string was adjusted to the advanced search tool by selecting all metadata as possible
matches and limiting the search period predefined in the objectives of this study (2011-2022).
By consensus within the working group, the papers were listed by relevance, and patents
were excluded. From a total of 443 results obtained, the first 100 articles were selected for
the pilot study. The papers were analyzed separately by two authors, to reduce the bias when
recording their votes concerning the relevance of the papers.
The pilot study resulted in 36 relevant papers (36%) in the scope of this study. As a
next step, an analysis of the metadata collected from this group of papers was performed
concluding that the most frequently used keyword in this field was “Cloud Computing”.
Figure 5 shows the results of the analysis of the keywords according to the frequency of
occurrence in the set of relevant studies. It allows the reader to get a complete overview of
the keywords associated with the topic.

123

81244

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

Fig. 5 Keywords analysis

In addition, it was possible to observe the occurrence of certain words in most of the
relevant paper titles such as video (69.4%), transcoding (63.9%), or cloud (41.7%).
Consequently, the pilot study conducted allowed us to modify the search string by replacing
the word “Architecture” with “Cloud Computing”. The same structure and preset order as
the pilot search string was maintained, as can be seen in Table 3.
As a next step, the working group defined a set of bibliographic databases to find the
relevant papers for this study. This set contains many scientific publications within the field
of Computer Science. Among the databases are ACM Digital Library, IEEE Xplore, and
Scopus. Kitchenham et al. [42] mention that searching in IEEE, and ACM guarantees good
coverage of important journals and conferences and at least two general indexing systems.
However, we have also included Scopus. According to [43], Scopus contains a total of about
77.8 million core records while Web of Science covers 74.8 million scholarly data, which
will allow us to have at our disposal almost all publications related to the topic.
To perform the automatic search, the search string was structured following the specifications of the advanced search tool of each of the databases. However, a segmentation
of the meta-data considered for the retrieval of the papers was performed. In ACM Digital
Library, only the abstract was used for the search since it considered a greater number of
articles to be retrieved than using a combination of Title + Abstract + Keywords. In IEEE

Table 3 Search keywords
Search strings
Pilot search string:

(“cloud” OR “cloud-based” OR “architecture”) AND (“video” OR “media”
OR “multimedia”) AND (“coding” OR “encoding” OR “transcoding”)

Final search string:

(“cloud” OR “cloud-based” OR “cloud computing”) AND (“video” OR
“media” OR “multimedia”) AND (“coding” OR “encoding” OR “transcoding”)

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81245

Xplore the Abstract was used as the search field together with a filter that limits the topics to
be considered, such as cloud computing, video coding, video streaming, data compression,
transcoding, resource allocation, learning (artificial intelligence), and multimedia computing. Scopus was used because it includes search platforms such as ScienceDirect and indexes
external databases. Since this platform indexes scientific papers from external databases, the
results obtained from the two previous databases were discarded.

3.5 Data extraction and synthesis
The results obtained using the automated search using the keywords shown in Table 3 were
further processed and finally, snowballing search was applied.
1. The automated search described in the previous section serves as the first step in selecting
studies. This is in accordance with the application of search strings in the abovementioned internet databases to obtain the first set of preliminary evidence studies. When
the results of all the selected data sources were added together, the initial step yielded
867 works. ACM Digital Library contributed 80 works to the total, 526 from IEEE, and
261 from Scopus.
2. The second step is the analysis of duplicate titles and articles. The group of works obtained
in the first step was subjected to the inclusion/exclusion criteria previously established in
Section 3.3, which also took into account the titles of each article. The duplicate articles
that were obtained from the various online databases were also removed. 664 articles
were obtained from this step.
3. The third step is the analysis of meta-data, considering each article’s abstract and keywords to determine if they meet the selection criteria or not. Applying this step 70 articles
remained.
4. The full-text analysis is the fourth step. In this task, the whole texts of the articles acquired
are examined to produce a more in-depth analysis of their adherence to the selection
criteria. Those who satisfy the inclusion requirements are then picked after this. The
final set of papers consisted of 46 papers in total when this process was finished.
5. Using a snowballing search technique is the fifth step. Applying the selection criteria
to the studies located using the first search technique is the final phase. To locate every
conceivable piece of evidence, we apply the snowballing search technique approach to
pick out any papers that may have been missed by the automated search. This approach
entails reviewing the list of references or quotes for each article in the collection of papers,
or “backward snowballing,” and then “forward snowballing” the citations provided for
each piece to look for further sources or original documents. The topic covered in this
study has quite specific criteria, so it wasn’t possible to pinpoint a specific collection
of articles to use while applying the snowballing search technique. Due to the number
of citations, it was decided to choose two of them as potential candidates for applying
this technique: (1) “Cloud transcoder: Bridging the format and resolution gap between
Internet videos and mobile devices.” [44], and (2) “Prediction-Based Dynamic Resource
Allocation for Video Transcoding in Cloud Computing” [45]. As a result of taking this
step, we were able to add another 3 new articles that we discovered after using the
snowball technique.
Once the steps of the research method had been followed, 49 articles that adhered to the
selection criteria were published between January 2011 and December 2022. These articles
are referred to as primary studies. The steps taken in this work and the outcomes attained at
each stage are represented in Table 4.

123

81246
Table 4 Primary papers selected
after each step

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

Steps

Databases

Papers per
database

Papers
selected

1st Step

ACM

80

8671

Automatic search

IEEE

526

on databases

SCOPUS

261

2nd Step

ACM

68

Analysis of titles

IEEE

416

and duplicates

SCOPUS

180

3rd Step

ACM

15

Analysis of

IEEE

36

meta-data

SCOPUS

19

4th Step

ACM

8

Full text

IEEE

27

Analysis

SCOPUS

11

5th Step

Snowballing search

3

6642

70

46

49

1 Search date: 03.12.2022
2 Duplicate papers were not considered

3.5.1 Validity control
Following the working technique used to define the search chain, described in Section 3.4, to
reduce bias and subjectivity in the article selection process, two authors analyzed a number
of papers and, at their discretion, determined which papers met or not the selection criteria.
The authors worked from the second to the fourth step of the search and selection process
described above. Together, they processed the meta-data of the articles resulting from step
1, with the aim of identifying repeated articles. All papers were then randomly distributed
(50% for each), to reduce bias among revisions. The papers accepted by each author in the
different steps were incorporated into the primary set of studies.
In addition, for the last step, the two authors worked together, applying the snowballing
technique to ensure that all articles meeting the inclusion/exclusion conditions were found
and correctly selected.

3.6 Reporting results
A report of the results obtained (the final stage of the applied article selection methodology)
is presented in Section 4 of this work to develop the analysis and classifications extracted
from the chosen primary studies.

4 Media cloud encoding: review
4.1 Introduction
Based on the search and selection process described in Section 3, 49 papers were selected
related to video encoding or transcoding process over cloud infrastructures. These papers

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81247

have been published from 2011 until mid-2022 following the distribution presented in Fig. 6.
As we can see, from 2015 until 2020, the average number of papers published was 6 papers per
year. An adequate number for such a closed topic as video encoding in cloud environments.
From these works we have made a study of the titles and their abstracts to analyze the
words with the highest frequency, obtaining the Fig. 7. In this figure, we observe that the
five terms with the highest frequency are: video, transcoding, cloud, streaming, and system.
All of them are ordered from most to least frequency of occurrence. All terms that appear in
Fig. 5 are related to the topic of this review suggesting that the selection of papers has been
adequate.
We have grouped the selected works into 3 big groups; according to the type of virtualization technology (Virtual Machines (VMs) vs. Containers), and delivery on the cloud (see
Fig. 8). In the group based on VMs, we have distinguished between static clusters developed
with MapReduce or other technologies; elastic infrastructures based on public, private, or
Federated clouds; and finally, works where only virtual machines were used. Then, we have
the solutions based on containers, which have been divided into the works that use serverless,
which are based on the execution model where the cloud provider is responsible for executing
a piece of code by dynamically allocating the resources, and other solutions implemented
using only simple containers. Finally, we have the group based on the delivery, where the
papers included in this group show transcoding solutions to improve the delivery of the video
stream. In this case, we can distinguish between the solutions through edge architectures or
content delivery networks (CDNs).

4.2 Encoding proposals based on virtual machines
4.2.1 Static clusters
In cloud computing, a static cluster refers to a fixed number of VMs that are connected and
configured to work as a single unit. These resources may be hosted on a cloud provider’s

Fig. 6 Number of papers related to the topic published per year

123

81248

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

Fig. 7 Word cloud from the abstracts of the selected papers

infrastructure and accessed over the internet through a cloud computing platform. In a static
cluster, the configuration of the cluster is fixed and does not change dynamically. This means
that the cluster has a predetermined set of nodes or servers that are designated to perform
specific tasks, and the resources of the cluster are allocated fixedly.
To use a static cluster for video encoding in the cloud, you need to provision and configure
the cluster to meet the needs of your workload. This may involve selecting the types and
number of computing resources to include in the cluster, as well as configuring the cluster to
allocate resources fixedly.
Once the cluster is set up, you can use it to process video files by submitting them to
the cluster for encoding. The cluster will then distribute the workload across the available
resources and perform the encoding in parallel, potentially reducing the time required to
complete the task. However, if the workload increases or decreases significantly, the static
cluster may not be able to scale up or down to meet the changing demands, which could
impact the performance of the task.
Two subcategories have been identified inside static clusters: MapReduce and other programming models.

MapReduce MapReduce is a programming model and an associated implementation for
processing and generating large data sets with a parallel, distributed algorithm on a cluster.
In a MapReduce-based video encoding system, the input video data is divided into smaller
chunks and distributed across the nodes of the cluster. Each node then processes its assigned
chunk of data using the map function, and the results are passed to the reduce function, which
aggregates the results and produces the final output. MapReduce can be an effective way to
perform video encoding tasks at scale, as it allows parallel processing and can handle large
amounts of data efficiently. Even though it may not be the most suitable approach for all
video encoding, due to the difficulty in scaling according to demand, there are quite a few
works related to MapReduce because it does not require more complex programming and
configuration compared to other approaches.

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81249

Fig. 8 Classification carried out for the selected papers

A video sequence could be divided into sub-sequences and each sub-sequence into Groups
Of Pictures (GOPs). From this idea, the authors of [46] assign each GOPs to the different nodes
to take advantage of parallel processing. After the encoding process, each video fragment is
merged synchronously. Moreover, the variable segmentation is used and the advantages and
disadvantages of obtaining heterogeneous GOPs are analyzed; however, the complexity of

123

81250

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

the GOP within the compression process is not considered. For the compression process, a
speed control scheme is presented according to the type of keyframe identified in the mapping
stage. The main drawback of this proposal is that it does not have an experimental phase.
The research paper [47] introduces CTrans, a cloud-based distributed video transcoding
system utilizing Hadoop and MapReduce. CTrans analyzes video streams, dividing them into
subtasks for individual transcoding. It organizes the output, concatenates sequence parts, and
can either transmit them immediately or store them for later use, such as video-on-demand.
The architecture comprises input, output modules, and the CTrans core, enabling distributed
video encoding. The system strategically uses I-frames for video segmentation, known for
encoding efficiency. CTrans dynamically adjusts transcoding formats during operations to
cater to diverse device requests. The prototype demonstrates a substantial 70% reduction in
encoding time compared to sequential encoding.
Hadoop is an open-source software framework that was born from the MapReduce programming model. In Hadoop, MapReduce is implemented as a programming interface and a
runtime system that manages the execution of MapReduce jobs on a Hadoop cluster. Hadoop
uses the Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) to distribute segments of data among nodes
that can be processed massively in parallel.
Using this type of technology, the paper [48] proposes CloudDMSS, a cloud-based distributed multimedia streaming service that adheres to Hadoop’s structure while remaining
adaptable to cloud computing services. It leverages Hadoop for multimedia data storage and
utilizes MapReduce for processing distributed parallel tasks. CloudDMSS consists of three
main components: HadoopDMT for transcoding, HadoopDMS for streaming, and CMM for
multimedia management. The authors design a workflow based on dual-Hadoop clusters for
each physical cluster, introducing algorithms such as content replication, system recovery
for HadoopDMS, CMM management, and SRC for streaming job distribution. A web-based
control panel is developed to monitor cloud resources. Performance evaluations are conducted on both a local testbed and a public cloud using Cloudit 2.0. Despite challenges in
commercial cloud environments (unpredictable networks, VM I/O traffic), CloudDMSS consistently delivers stable and efficient distributed transcoding services, as confirmed by the
comprehensive performance tests.
Another proposal with this technology is [49]. This paper presents a cloud video transcoding system using the Hadoop framework. Four video compression standards are proposed:
low, standard, high quality, and high definition which are integrated within the framework.
The proposal implements a method to split the video into shots. For the transcoding process, a modified version of FFmpeg is used to adjust to the proposed video framework and
architecture. Evaluation tests are carried out using several virtual machines (4, 8, and 16) to
evaluate the performance of the proposal. The quality tests performed show higher PSNR
values greater than 34 dB.
The authors of [50] propose a cloud-based distributed video transcoding system that
exploits the dependency between the GOPs of a video to reduce the bit rate and encoding time.
They use the Scalable Video Coding (SVC) codec to obtain the dependency information about
a raw video, and the encoded video is stored together with the respective GOP distances for
future requests. After segmenting the video, the transcoding controller sends each segment to
virtual instances in the cloud for transcoding using MapReduce. In the performance tests, they
use raw video streams and private cloud architecture with 10 computing units. The overhead
introduced by the deployed module is negligible (0.008% to 1.64%) for adjacent tasks. To
analyze the bitrate and transcoding time, they compare the proposed method with fixed-size
segments (average size of the variable segments). According to the tests, the bitrate is reduced
with the proposed scheme up to 10.8% maintaining the quality analyzed with YPSNR. If

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81251

the video fragment size is set to 64 GOP, the transcoding time increases 53% compared to
one GOP. However, with the proposed one, it increases by 21%. Thus, the proposed also
transcodes faster than the case with average fragment size.
The capacity of new users to consume high-quality video content opens the need to
explore alternative video processing systems that adjust to the current consumption patterns (sources, devices, etc.) and network conditions. The work [51] proposes a dynamic
self-adaptive Hadoop scheduling (SAHS) algorithm to maximize resource utilization and
decrease transcoding time to improve the QoS for DASH. It uses Hadoop to perform MapReduce, a master node to manage slave nodes of different computational capacities, and a load
balancer to divide workloads in similar complexity proportions among nodes. Using packets
smaller than 32 MB increases the time to initiate a task and results in a longer transcoding
time. Therefore, the strategy of implementing the Max-MCT (MLMCT) multi-layer splitting
algorithm and using a packet size of 60 MB would result in a shorter transcoding time. The
evaluations were conducted on a server with VMware as a hypervisor, where there are 1
master node and 9 slave nodes.
Other proposal, where a system distributes and parallelizes the video transcoding process
and protects the content is presented on [52]. This system analyzes the video input and
divides the input into several parts, where each one is individually transcoded. The output of
the transcoding process is sorted and merged considering several scenarios. Some of them,
where the results will be streamed live over the network, and others where the results are
concatenated and stored for later use. Among the objectives of the system are: to allow static
or live inputs, to store the transcoding results, to be able to change the transcoding format
during an operation, to perform video protection in a distributed way to allow pay-per-quality
systems, and finally to allow the system to be self-scalable. Technologies such as MapReduce
and MPEG-TS storage are used to reach these objectives. The results of its prototype show
that the transcoding time is reduced by 70% when it is compared to sequential encoding.
Scheduling tasks on a cloud video encoding/transcoding platform is an important aspect
to be considered, as the ability to manage tasks with available resources can determine
the quality of a service or the overall cost of pay-per-use services. The authors of [53]
propose a task management algorithm for cloud-based video transcoding that considers the
computational load of each transcoding task. Their proposal, called Dynamic Adjustment
Slot and Complexity Aware Scheduler (DASCAS), includes a Slot Allocation algorithm,
a task selection policy, and a speculative mechanism. The evaluation tests performed the
transcoding with the H.264 codec of an HD video of more than 2 hours of duration. Their
results show that this proposal decreases the processing time by 18.6% for one user and
11.4% for more than one user, compared to a Fair Scheduler (FS) algorithm.
The work [54] shows a multimodal multimedia cloud architecture that contemplates storage, networking, virtualization, resource allocation, and efficient QoS capability. The service
layers used by the solution are infrastructure, platform, and service. Its platform as a service
called CEMMS implements the transcoding system using Hadoop. This last one allows for
storing, distributing, and processing multimedia data. The proposal includes a method for
splitting the video before processing. Xuggler and ACO (Ant Colony Optimization algorithm)
media processing libraries are used to determine the size of the cluster in the infrastructure
layer. The tests use the FFmpeg tool and video clips in MPEG-2 format of 16 seconds each,
with Full HD resolution (1920×1080 pixels) at 25 frames per second. The simulation shows
that the proposed CEMMS can optimally utilize the cloud resources to achieve the minimum
response time with the minimum resource cost and QoS guarantee.
Another proposal for encoding video using the Hadoop framework is shown in [55]. The
proposal uses the Map Reduce algorithm to introduce an intelligent division strategy for the

123

81252

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

blocks to be encoded. Taking performance metrics, the authors consider a proper block size
of 64 MB to be more efficient. The closest blocks belonging to the same coding task will
be processed by adjacent heterogeneous nodes to avoid network load. A set of metrics is
used to evaluate the quality and performance of the proposal. Experimental results show a
7% improvement in video distortion for a fixed 64 MB block size and a 3% improvement in
frame dependency distortion. In general terms, the proposed method reports an improvement
of around 6-9% in transcoding time.
The work [56] presents Stride, a distributed video transcoding system based on the Apache
Spark Big Data platform. It uses FFmpeg as a transcoding tool and analyzes the impact of
various parameters, such as segment size and the number of threads used by FFmpeg. They
found that larger segments require more memory, so they chose a segment size of 2 seconds to
provide robustness and loss recovery. They also observed that partitions containing a smaller
number of segments could provide the TaskScheduler with more flexibility to minimize
the idle time between cores. However, this could potentially increase Spark’s scheduling
overhead. Relative to local implementation, Stride uses less than 19.86% of time, using 4
times the amount of cores (32 cores), further illustrating the value of Spark scheduling. It
also outperforms Scala implementations by 1.9% to 2.8%. In terms of scalability, Stride as
it is given more resources gets an average speedup of 30% more for every 8 cores added to a
worker node. For the testing stage, they considered one virtual machine (VM) for the master
node and 4 VMs as worker nodes, 3 videos in 4K resolution, and a Constant Rate Factor
(CRF) of 28.

Others In addition to MapReduce, other technologies allow the development of solutions
on static clusters in cloud environments. In this subsection, we will present other existing
works on video encoding over static cloud environments.
For example, [57] proposes a method for analyzing and optimizing parallel video transcoding for clusters with heterogeneous machines. They explore a taxonomy of video transcoding
methods using static (or semi-dynamic) scheduling. The analysis is based on the costs
incurred in the different transcoding methods on heterogeneous platforms, considering CBR
(Constant-Bit-Rate) and VBR (Variable-Bit-Rate) encoding. They provide closed-form solutions for the segmentation problem in the case of CBR input content, and the appropriate
heuristics for VBR content are considered. The study presents extensive experimental results
on the most important encoding strategies, where they consider the execution time, and also
the characteristics of the output produced. The presented performance metrics are based on
actual transcoding of full-length movies, with a total of 3.7 hours and 325000 frames on
average. The proposed method achieves a trade-off between execution time and distortion
by combining the master node communication with N workers at the same time.
In this work, the authors use cloud computing to offer a transcoding service that covers the
format and resolution limitations of mobile devices. This service uses the video stream link
to store it in a cloud cache and encode it according to the user’s requirements. As a result,
the power consumption of mobile devices is minimized and a cache copy is available for
future requests. The proposal implemented 244 servers, with 340 TB of cache in the cloud, a
bandwidth of 6.9 Gbps per node capable of handling 100K requests daily. FFmpeg is used as
a tool to process video content. In addition, it integrates a solution to cache the most popular
videos, called “Task Predictor”. Performance tests showed that 85% of the encoded videos
came from P2P links.
The paper [58] presents a cloud-based transcoding system based on the computational
capacity required for video transcoding taking into account the characteristics of video segments and load balancing in the cloud. A parallel transcoding framework is presented. Their

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81253

strategy contemplates the adaptive segmentation of the video according to its complexity
and granularity. The derived tasks are divided into subtasks, and these last ones are executed
in the cluster according to the load balancer strategy (where the load on each core must be
balanced) and Minimal Finish Time (MFT). This set of processes constitutes the heuristic
algorithm, named the minimum longest queue finish time algorithm (MLFT). The simulation results show that the proposed algorithm outperforms the algorithms proposed by the
literature in all cases (overhead and average task finish time).
Quality of experience (QoE) is a measure of how well a multimedia streaming system
delivers content to the end user. It takes into account various factors such as the video or
audio quality, the stability of the stream, the amount of buffering or latency, and the overall
usability of the system. One key aspect of QoE is the quality of service (QoS) at each step of
the streaming process. This includes the quality of the network connection, the performance
of the servers and infrastructure, and the efficiency of the streaming protocols and algorithms
being used. Ensuring a high QoS at each step is critical to delivering a good QoE to the end
user. This requires careful planning and management of the entire streaming system, as well
as regular monitoring and optimization to ensure that it is operating at peak performance.
The paper [59] proposes a live video transcoding (COVT) system that optimizes resource
provisioning and task scheduling on the cloud to ensure a good Quality of Service (QoS).
The system focuses on two key parameters: system delay time and target video segment
size. It utilizes the FFmpeg transcoding tool and offers different transcoding modes to adjust
processing time and output segment size. COVT employs performance profiling for each
transmission mode using historical data. Based on these profiles, it develops a prediction
model to determine the optimal probability distribution that minimizes the number of CPUs
required for content preparation while maintaining QoS quality constraints. Additionally, the
proposed scheduling algorithm utilizes QoS measurements to prevent outages or prediction
errors in bursty workloads. The system architecture comprises three main components: video
consumer, video service provider, and cloud cluster. The authors implemented a prototype
system for validation and evaluation, using a cluster with six virtual machines and an additional server for resource scheduling and communication with the cluster. They compared
the proposal with two schemes: peak load provisioning and heuristic provisioning. Overall,
COVT can save 45% of resources in terms of CPU hours compared to peak load provisioning,
and with heuristic provisioning, it consumes fewer resources at the beginning and end but
fails to meet QoS requirements.
Finally, some effort is devoted to mitigate the workloads in data centers involved in processing video content. Paper [60] presents a new video transcoding system that utilizes hardware
acceleration to achieve significant performance improvements over traditional CPU-based
solutions. The system is designed for large-scale video processing and includes a hardware acceleration block with Video Coding Units (VCU) that are deployed in a distributed
warehouse-scale processing infrastructure. The system uses the Borg task scheduler to manage in parallel the loading, segmentation, concatenation, and distribution of video content
in its global network. The experiments conducted on thousands of servers indicate that the
system offers between 20 and 33 times better performance per cost compared to the previous
system designed with last-generation CPUs. The system supports both x264 and VP9 codecs
and can handle a variety of output characteristics, including on-demand, video conferences,
and live broadcasts. The infrastructure is designed with VCU machines for video transcoding
and non-accelerated machines to manage the distribution of work across nodes. The production acceleration system with 10 cards (20xVCU) is compared to some base cases, including
a dual-socket server with x86 Intel Skylake CPU and 384 GiB of DRAM, a system with
4 Nvidia T4 GPUs with the dual-socket server as host, and the baseline of 4 GPUs with 4

123

81254

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

additional VCU cards. Taking the CPU as a baseline, with x264 the GPU improves performance by 3.5x more, and the system with 20xVCU by 20.9x times. However, with VP9 the
system with 20xVCU is 99.4x superior to the CPU. The quality analysis shows that x264
VCU has an average bitrate 11.5% higher than libx264(software), and VP9 VCU has a bitrate
18% higher than libvpx (software).

4.2.2 Elastic clusters
An elastic cluster is a group of computing resources that can be scaled up or down as needed
to meet the demands of a workload. An elastic cluster in the cloud can be a useful resource for
video encoding or transcoding tasks, particularly if the workload is variable or unpredictable.
In a cloud environment, an elastic cluster can be configured to scale up or down as needed to
meet the demands of the video encoding process. This can help to ensure that the cluster has
sufficient resources to complete the task in a timely manner, while also minimizing costs by
only using the resources that are needed.
To use an elastic cluster for video encoding in the cloud, you will need to provision
adaptively the cluster to meet the needs of the workload. This may involve selecting the
types and number of computing resources to include in the cluster, as well as setting up
rules or thresholds for scaling the cluster up or down. Once the cluster is set up, you can
use it to process video files by submitting them to the cluster for encoding. The cluster
should then distribute the workload across the available resources and perform the encoding
in parallel, potentially reducing the makespan to complete the encoding process. As the
workload changes, the cluster should scale up or down.
In the following points, we are going to analyze the existing works to encode video on
cloud architectures based on elastic clusters. To have a better classification of the papers, we
have subdivided them according to the cloud infrastructure used, whether public, private, or
Federated.

Public clouds Public cloud refers to a cloud computing model in which resources such as
computing, storage, and networking are made available over the internet to anyone who wants
to use them. Public clouds are owned and operated by third-party companies, which provide
access to their infrastructure and resources on a pay-per-use basis.
Some papers, that present simulations or train models are classified in this category because
they make assumptions or use data based on some public cloud infrastructure.
To adjust the allocation of resources to the transcoding task, [45] presents a resource
provisioning (VM) algorithm for video transcoding. Using a prediction module, the master
node dynamically allocates resources to the transcoding servers, both of which can simultaneously process several segments at a time. The segments have different lengths, where each
GOP is composed of only one I-frame. To detect these frames, the video is spatially reduced
(from 16 CIF to 1 CIF). Simulation tests were performed with the SimPy framework. The
results of the simulation show that the proposed algorithm compared to a base case provides
a sustainable service with the lowest number of virtual machines in the different workloads
tested. As inputs, 24 and 30 fps videos are taken, with 70% of them in SD and 30% in HD,
with an average sequence size between 15000 and 18000 frames and a maximum GOP size
of 250 frames.
With the premise of decreasing the delay in starting video transmissions and minimizing
resource provisioning costs, a cloud-based video streaming (CVSS) architecture is presented
in [61]. It maps transcoding tasks to manage dynamic resource provisioning that does not
impact QoS both at the start and during video streaming. The architecture is composed of

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81255

six main components and covers video segmentation as well as the caching policy. The job
manager is responsible for managing the tasks between the virtual machines of homogeneous
resources. The scaling manager is responsible for the provisioning of resources according
to QoS terms. However, they have been able to estimate that the execution time of the same
GOP can vary on a machine with the same performance; they attribute this to the fact that
a virtual machine can run on different hardware from the same provider. Simulation tests,
with specifications from Amazon EC2 virtual machines, show that the strategy of encoding
the shortest job incurs less cost and shorter startup time than other proposals considered. Its
provisioning policy reduces the cost by 70% compared to static policies.
The features of mobile devices are increasingly higher, one of them is the resolution of
their screens capable of playing high-quality videos. However, the battery is still a limited
resource, so the content has to be encoded on the server side taking into account the reduction
of overhead on client devices. For these reasons, [62] introduces a cloud-based real-time
video transcoding framework designed to adapt high-quality, low-latency video for mobile
devices. Implemented in Microsoft Azure, this framework dynamically scales by creating
transcoding channels for each request, accommodating low-latency requirements, such as
those in video conferences. To manage tasks efficiently, minimize costs, and address latency
issues, the system incorporates a predictive-based task scheduling algorithm, considering the
pay-per-use model of VMs. The architecture comprises components like resource monitor,
transcoding, controller, and task manager, integrating the Azure messaging queue service.
Multiple filters can be applied to the same video to generate outputs for various devices. The
evaluation tests, utilizing the H.264 codec and FFmpeg tool for tasks like scaling, decoding,
and transcoding, reveal that congestion between virtual machines is a significant contributor
to latency. The paper suggests that employing a dual-level tree topology in Azure can decrease
computational load and latency by leveraging multiple transcoding sources.
In addition, cloud computing has made it possible to redefine video content consumption models. Its constant evolution and its ability to manage jobs with a high computational
load allow exploring new alternatives to processes such as video transcoding. Therefore, the
authors of [63] developed a video transcoding platform using Google’s cloud computing
infrastructure. The system is composed of two subsystems: servers and workers. Servers
handle client requests and perform an analysis of the results, which can be consulted after
video encoding. The server can replicate on the global network depending on client requests.
The second subsystem is made up of a group of workers that perform the transcoding processes. To store the tasks that the workers periodically consult to select a task according
to the established priority policy, a database is required. A worker during transcoding will
not perform additional tasks to avoid memory errors, network problems, etc. The authors
conducted evaluation tests to measure the efficiency and scalability of the system. Results
show that the proposed platform reduces latency compared to a local server.
As it is known, the demand for high-quality video content from mobile devices is growing;
however, due to network limitations (bandwidth, fluctuations, etc.) and the limited capacity of
mobile devices (processing, battery, etc.), providing this type of service remains a challenge.
The proposal [64] implements an infrastructure as a service (IaaS) to address this problem.
It allows them to focus on the dynamic allocation of resources in the video transcoding
processes, where the processing of the different representations of the content are performed
on the server. The architecture uses temporary storage of the most requested video sequences
to avoid transcoding processes. Each video input is segmented into chunks and distributed as
jobs to the different transcoding servers, dynamically provisioned by a load controller. The
proposal contemplates the assignment of priority to videos based on their request. In addition,
a module to verify the availability of the cached stream is introduced. They use the CloudSim

123

81256

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

simulation framework to evaluate the proposal. They compare with the conventional firstcome-first-serve (FCFS) method and with session-based admission control [65]. The H.264
codec is employed at a fixed resolution of 720 × 1080, and frame rate change from 20 to 30
fps. Of the three test cases analyzed: (i) when the loads fluctuate insignificantly over time,
(ii) the load has jumped a lot from the previous case, (iii) the load suddenly drops by a large
number; only in the first case, the load predictive method is efficient. Therefore, the proposal
can be considered only when the workload is constant.
Other proposal is [66]. This paper presents the Differentiated cloud-Assisted VIdeo
Streaming (DAVIS) encoding framework optimizes video encoding and transcoding from
a single source to multiple destinations. It dynamically selects the source and the encoding
parameters and it uses Forward Error Correction (FEC) to optimize quality and maximize
network utilization. The DAVIS uses end-to-end delay differences to perform quality adjustments, and its multiple destinations based on the Gilbert loss model and Markov Chains. The
tests are performed in a real scenario with AWS EC2 and the Exata emulation platform, and
show an improvement in objective quality, in terms of PSNR, of between 5.12 to 10.2 dB
compared to literature work. It also guarantees 96.5% frame delivery under delay constraints.
One of the challenges of on-demand video streaming is how to use cloud resources to
provide a proper QoE for end users during the streaming. From this idea, [67] develops the
Cloud-based Video Streaming Service (CVS2) architecture for video-on-demand transcoding using cloud services. This architecture uses a QoS-aware task scheduler for mapping
transcoding tasks concerning the QoE perceived by users. The proposal performs a heuristic
mapping of the batch queue (main queue) to determine which type of virtual machine uses less
completion time; the virtual machine will store jobs in a local queue to minimize downtime.
In addition, the component responsible for managing the provisioning of heterogeneous VMs
within the cluster is developed to minimize Streaming Service Provider (SSP) costs while
maintaining QoE. The evaluation was carried out on a set of heterogeneous AWS machines;
it was shown that the complexity of a GOP determines whether it is necessary to pay for
a machine with high performance (GPU, dedicated memory, etc.). The performance tests
were performed on the CloudSim simulator, using the characteristics of the virtual machines
provided by AWS for the experiments. Their results indicate that the start and finish times of
a task are mitigated by using heterogeneous machines. Also, it shows a saving of up to 85%
in processing costs concerning static provisioning (homogeneous machines).
Some cloud service providers offer transcoding services to their users with a specific QoS
guarantee, which also appears as a Service Level Agreement (SLA). This can be a challenge
for cloud service providers to provide computing resources and schedule transcoding tasks
while meeting the SLA requirement, more so during live streaming. Therefore, [68] presents
a system that manages resource provisioning and video transcoding tasks under dynamic
and uncertain live workloads over the cloud. The system uses Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL) to train a Neural Network (NN) model to determine resource provisioning periodically.
The NN model is trained using historical transcoding task data. The system also includes a
method to estimate transcoding times. The estimates made are considered to schedule the
transcoding tasks taking into account the real-time QoE to meet the criteria of an SLA. The
system consists of two components: the environment and the agent. The environment includes
a task queue, a task scheduler, and instances. The agent is responsible for training an offline
NN model by transcoding task histories and using the model for online resource provisioning.
The authors use a simulation system with market characteristics and recommendations for
the training process. They use A3C, a state-of-the-art actor-critical learning method, as their
training algorithm. Performance tests show that the DRL-based policy decreases the average

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81257

task failure rate by up to 89%, while the average VM cost increases by a maximum of 4%
over the other 3 base cases.
A scalable video transcoding system with a producer/consumer model over the cloud
is presented in [69]. The authors of this paper survey the challenges involved in applying
large-scale video processing in public clouds. The paper demonstrates a hybrid design that
includes a Java application and a bash script. The Java application forms the batch processing
framework, while the bash script performs the actual transcoding work (uses FFmpeg). The
proposal starts from the study of an existing transcoding system that reaches linear horizontal scalability of up to 1000 vCPU cores, however, after reaching this number, performance
degradation is experienced. To improve the performance of the system they integrate a message queuing layer, converting the system into a batch model. This improves the horizontal
scalability of the video transcoding system. Large-scale testing on AWS EC2 indicates that
the scalable video transcoding system maintains linear horizontal scalability at 10100 vCPU
cores.
Cloud providers offer a catalog of instances for different workloads. Instances can be
provisioned using a combination of resources such as memory, CPU, storage, GPU, etc. The
configuration of these resources implies different costs, therefore finding the instances that
best fit the workloads could help to reduce costs in this type of service. The work [70] shows
a method for the fast estimation of the encoding time of video segments and an algorithm that
combines the Pareto frontier and clustering techniques to calculate the number of instances
and their resources best adjusted to a video encoding task to minimize costs. The algorithm
uses x264 codec, so they perform a study of its different encoding parameters using video
sequences of different complexity. The results show a cost reduction of 15.8% and up to
47.8% compared to a random selection of EC2 instances.

Private clouds Private cloud refers to a cloud computing model in which resources such as
computing, storage, and networking are made available over a private network, usually to a
single organization. Private clouds are typically owned and operated by the organization that
uses them, and they are usually hosted on-premises data centers.
One of the first works where an elastic cluster was used on a private cloud architecture is [71]. The paper presents a transcoding system for real-time and cloud-based mobile
streaming that considers bandwidth constraints and different requirements of mobile devices.
The system uses map-reduce to manage transcoding jobs in a distributed environment and
H.264/SVC multimedia files to improve the dynamic adjustment mechanism and avoid image
quality loss. The system adjusts the most appropriate SVC codec to process the request based
on the network parameters, hardware characteristics, and profile agent (device). A prototype
was designed with three servers, 6 VMs per server, a mobile device, and a 3G Wi-Fi network
device. Tests were performed in different transmission states and show that the system can
maintain a certain level of service quality for dynamic network environments and ensure
smooth and complete multimedia transmission services.
Due to the inherent complexity of video transcoding processes, multiple software solutions
have been proposed to prepare this content. However, it remains a challenge to dynamically
determine the optimal resource allocation to save costs and ensure the QoS. With this premise,
the authors of [72] present an algorithm for dynamic resource allocation based on the large
deviation principle, capable of determining the number of nodes needed based on transcoding time fluctuations (transcoding jitter). To measure the trade-off between cost savings
and QoS guarantee, they designed a prototype architecture based on a cloud system. In the
proposed architecture, the load analyzer is the main component and the one in charge of
dynamic resource allocation that guarantees the probability of transcoding jitter below a

123

81258

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

desired threshold. For this purpose, the algorithm analyzes the bit rates in an iterative process
to determine if the number of available nodes satisfies the QoS. Evaluation tests are performed
on OpenStack with one controller node and 9 compute nodes, using FFmpeg for transcoding
1000 video segments of a duration between 30 sec to 10 min. Results show that as the number
of additional nodes increases, workload transcoding is reduced for future stages. They also
show that different QoS can be achieved by controlling the jitter threshold, keeping the cost
as low as possible.
The paper [73] presents the design and implementation of an open-source video encoding
and transcoding system called Morph, deployed on the cloud. Morph offers parallel video
segment transcoding, task management with the ability to adjust to QoS profiles, and elasticity
in resource provisioning. The system’s architecture consists of three layers: the interface
layer, the scheduling layer, and the provisioning layer. FFmpeg is used for transcoding tasks,
with two segmentation methods: fixed and dynamic. The system was deployed in a real
environment, and bottlenecks were identified, which were solved by using load balancers.
Processing time analysis was performed to evaluate the system’s performance given the
number of available workers.
Lately, video games in the cloud are gaining popularity and by 2023 the industry is expected
to generate around 4 billion dollars. However, the limitations of the network or the capacity
of devices (e.g. mobile) to consume high-quality content has meant considering strategies
for the delivery of this type of content. Therefore, the paper [74] presents a Content-Aware
Video Encoding (CAVE) method, where the highest number of bits is assigned to the regions
of each frame that the player considers important. For this approach, weights are determined
in each of the blocks of a frame from the player’s perspective which will then be considered
in the encoding. CAVE is implemented as a software component between the game process
and the encoder. It uses the HEVC codec and cloud computing infrastructure to meet the
low latency requirements that require it to run in real-time. In the executed tests performance
metrics such as SSIM, VMAF, BD-rate, quality fluctuations, and CPU time are measured.
Another proposal related to video transcoding in an elastic cluster over a private cloud
is shown in [75]. This paper presents Diversify Scheme for Multiform Video Resources
(DSMVR), a multimedia data hiding video transcoding scheme based on the framework
of parallel computing and intra-cloud environment. DSMVR integrates an algorithm for
scalable task allocation and a parallel computing framework for video transcoding in multiple
representations. The architecture consists of a server, administrator, worker, and storage
system (NAS). The administrator generates a transcoding request to the server, and the
server is responsible for managing the tasks among the worker nodes. To know the relative
performance of each worker, a previous codification is performed. A NAS server stores the
generated data. DSMVR was implemented on Java. Performance tests were performed with 1
and 64 desktop workers. Results show that the scheme with 16 workers achieves the maximum
transcoding speed. If the number of workers is increased, the performance decreases.
Some authors of this review propose a new distributed cloud-based architecture and
application to accelerate video encoding in [76]. The design of this proposal contemplates
horizontal elasticity, software-defined storage, computation, networking, adaptability with
multiple codecs, fault tolerance, and automation of encoding operations on worker nodes
(virtual machines). In the proposed solution, a video is divided into segments of fixed size,
for each segment an encoding job is generated. Each job is consumed by a worker node that
performs the encoding of the segment. Some technologies used for the implementation of the
proposal are OpenStack for the deployment of a Virtual Infrastructure, RabbitMQ as message
manager, Java (JRE) as execution environment, and FFmpeg as encoding tool. H.265 and
VP9 video codecs with different segment sizes and target bit rates are used in the validation

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81259

process. The proposal is evaluated in terms of scalability, workload, and work distribution,
varying the number of workers from 1 to 15. They indicate that 89% less encoding time can
be achieved compared to sequential encoding when using 15 workers. In terms of quality,
using PSNR, the proposal achieves a similar quality to sequential encoding.
Finally, the same authors propose another distributed video encoding architecture [77] to
take advantage of the elasticity, fault tolerance, and hyper-convergence that cloud computing
provides. They implement a distributed application to dynamically schedule encoding tasks
among several workers deployed over a virtual infrastructure. The solution design, implementation, and validation phases consider RAW content, uniform segmentation, message
middleware with RabbitMQ, H.265, VP9, and AV1 video codecs, and quality metrics such
as PSNR, MS-SSIM, and VIF. The designed architecture was deployed on a private cloud to
achieve hyper-convergence and the highest network performance. Their experimental results
show a significant decrease in execution time is achieved compared to full video encoding
(1 worker), from 61% to almost 91% when using 3 to 15 workers, with an efficiency higher
than 80% with 9 workers. In terms of quality, it is indicated that H.265 code does not reach
the quality levels obtained with VP9 and AV1 for all the metrics considered. In addition to
this, H.265 is the most affected by the change in segment size.

Federated clouds Federated cloud refers to a cloud computing model where different cloud
computing infrastructures support the sharing of arbitrary resources, from arbitrary application domains with arbitrary consumer groups across multiple administrative domains via a
common standard. Participants in a federation can share some of their resources and metadata
making them discoverable and accessible to the rest of the participating members.
There are few jobs where a federated cloud is used to perform video encoding tasks,
the only example found in this review is [78]. This paper proposes a comprehensive framework for the development of federated cloud video processing services for social network
providers. The system in their proposal includes several cloud providers (CP) implemented
with CLEVER middleware along with eXtensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP),
this includes the federation capability and distributed processing with Hadoop technologies.
They use Amazon S3 services as the distributed storage provider. To perform the resource
discovery task, each CLEVER domain stores the state of all available federated domains in
a NoSQL database. When a CLEVER domain requires external processing resources, pieces
of information about the available federated domains are retrieved from the database. To split
the transcoding work among the available federated CPs, a Cloud Broker is implemented.
Experimental results performed on “Cloud Federation for Transcoding” show that horizontal
federation makes the whole transcoding process more scalable and efficient. Moreover, it is
claimed that the horizontal parallelization introduced by the Cloud federation is better than
the vertical one provided by the single CP domain Hadoop cluster.
4.2.3 Single virtual machines
Virtual machines and cloud computing are closely related technologies that are often used
together but are not the same. Cloud computing is a model of computing in which computing
resources (virtualized or not) are delivered over the Internet on a pay-per-use basis. Cloud
computing services can include storage, networking, computing, and other services that are
provided over the Internet. The following papers are based on VMs that can be used in a
cloud scenario, but they are not tested on it. They are selected for this review because they
show interesting proposals related to the video encoding topic, which could be implemented
in a real cloud environment.

123

81260

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

The authors of [79] proposed a method to minimize the use of cloud computing resources
for video transcoding by tuning the transcoding configurations. They used the Lyapunov
optimization framework to minimize the output bit rate while maintaining queue stability. The
bit rates for each configuration were estimated through a model trained offline with historical
data. They tested their approach with two 1080p video streams averaging 10 minutes and
three presets of the H.264 codec: superfast, faster, and medium. Each job was dispatched to a
virtual machine to be processed, and the load balancer dispatched jobs among different VMs
to balance the load. The simulations showed that their approach achieved a similar output bit
rate with only about 5 seconds delay compared to the static method with the ’medium’ preset,
which suffered a longer delay of 142 seconds for a 5.47 Mbps bit rate when the system was
heavily loaded.
A new method to accelerate the game computing process in the cloud providing additional
information to the video encoder is presented on [80]. The proposed method is based on the
RR-GaaS category, which offers advantages to both developers and players by performing
server-side tasks such as executing game logic, updating and rendering scenes, and encoding
and streaming video. The proposed method is an intelligent acceleration system that uses
information from the game engine to adjust the encoding parameters. It is also generic
and adaptable to game engines. For video encoding, the H.264 standard reference software
is used. The visual quality of the proposed method is evaluated by performing objective
tests and subjective evaluations, showing up to 24% acceleration for the whole encoding
process and 39% for the motion estimation operation concerning their previous proposal.
The subjective quality tests (using MOS) show that the proposed method is only 17.55%
away from conventional encoding and 1.7 times more than the previously proposed method.
The PSNR and MOS results confirm an improvement in the quality and performance of the
proposed method.

4.3 Encoding proposals based on containers
4.3.1 Serverless
Serverless architectures can be used to perform video encoding/transcoding tasks in a costeffective and scalable way. In a serverless architecture, tasks are typically performed by small,
independent units of code (called “functions”) that are executed in response to events (such
as the upload of a new video file).
An initial proposal following this paradigm was developed by Fouladi et al. [81]. They
propose the Mu framework intended for fine-grained parallelism, using a functional programming style deployed on AWS Lambda. Thus, instead of invoking workers in response to a
single event, they invoke them in bulk, thousands at a time. In this approach, the VP8 encoder
(the only one used), has to be modified to reencode consecutive chunks of 6 frames (this is a
particular election made by the authors) and then perform the “rebase” phase (running serially) to compound the chunks in the final encoded video sequence. This implementation could
be improved by increasing the chunks’ size (e.g., chunks of 2 seconds or 48 frames) to avoid
communication among workers (“rebase” phase) and increasing the reported performance
significantly (more than 8 times faster).
A little later, a serverless video processing framework appeared. The authors design a
solution called Sprocket [82], that uses a serverless framework for video processing in the
cloud. Sprocket framework manages the access, upload, encoding, decoding, and hosting of
processed video and images in a low-latency, low-cost, fully parallelized environment. In

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81261

addition, it integrates image processing and computer vision applications. Developers can
use all these implementations to build their processing pipelines or extend functionalities.
Applications such as video filters, can take advantage of massive container-based parallelism
to decode, filter, and encode each segment of a video. As for the processed files, they are stored
and managed by S3. To apply a filter (e.g. color change) and encode the video, the FFmpeg
tool is used. The solution deployed under the Amazon Lambda infrastructure was evaluated
with 1000 instances (workers); where each second of video is processed by one instance.
In the evaluation, the task that uses the most computation time is encoding with 34.7%,
followed by decoding with 30.4%. The use of this serverless service to deploy applications
allows minimal startup delay, high parallelism, low latency, and low cost.

4.3.2 Others
Microservices is a new model of building applications, which involves breaking down a complex application into a set of small, independent, modular components called microservices
that can be developed, deployed, and scaled independently. Microservices, containers, and
Kubernetes can be used together to build a scalable and reliable video encoding platform. In
this scenario, the microservices that make up the video encoding platform are packaged into
containers and deployed and managed by the Kubernetes platform.
Following the microservices model, and using containers and Kubernetes, there are several works, which improve the video encoding systems to give better performance. With
this premise, the authors of [83] present Morph: a video transcoding system in the cloud to
maximize the use of resources. The proposed method considers task scheduling and resource
provisioning as a stochastic optimization problem on two-time scales. The architecture, composed of several modules, presents an interface to manage transcoding requests, a deployment
of homogeneous instances for the transcoding process, a task scheduler in charge of distributing the tasks according to the Value-based task management (VBS) policy, and the resource
management policy. This last one determines the number of VM instances to be shut down
or activated at the beginning of each task according to the state of the system in the slow and
fast time scale. To determine the selection of actions of this policy we take advantage of the
Q-Learning method, which is a model-free reinforcement learning technique. The system
developed in Python implements a Docker-based cloud environment and uses FFmpeg for
transcoding. The tests performed show that in the transcoding time estimation, the normalized
prediction error is within the range of -0.08 to 0.08. The learning-based resource provisioning
policy and the value-based task scheduling policy (LRP-VBS) show that they can perform
effectively for the three management policies considered.
To reduce the economic cost of the transcoding tasks, [84] presents a micro-servicesbased transcoding platform hosted in an ad-hoc server farm on a Rasberry Pi 2 Rack (RPi)
implementing Docker. The inherent cloud transcoding tasks performed, such as segmentation, concatenation, task scheduling, transcoding, and content streaming, are handled as
isolated micro-services in lightweight containers. This service model allows for scalability
and continuous development. Moreover, as each microservice is encapsulated in an image
managed by Docker Swarm, they can be automatically started on the 16 available servers to
respond to clients when they request a movie. For transcoding, the FFmpeg tool (H.264) and
the power of both the CPU and GPU of each RPi are used. The evaluation tests performed
are compared with a high-performance server, where it is shown that using the full power of
the server farm, the transcoding time is 2.4 times faster than the workstation compared.
Another alternative for multimedia content processing using a container-based cloud
encoding system is presented on [85]. The architecture, based on the server-worker model,

123

81262

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

has the following layers: a) From Layer: which allows supplying the original video content
from the clients to the system; b) Service Layer: which contains most of the internal modules
of the system (transcoding, message queue, cache, etc.); and c) Controller Service: which
controls and supervises the workflow among the previous layers. The deployment of the
solution uses containers with Docker. Each container (worker) uses FFmpeg to transcode
videos using the H.265 codec. The worker tasks are managed by a messaging queue, called
Rabbit MQ. HDFS is used for content storage to ensure redundancy. Redis is used to manage the cache and MySQL to store information from other services (monitoring). Several of
these services run in separate containers on a master node. In this way, it also implements
two transcoding containers to take advantage of the available GPU. The deployment of the
solution in a private cloud has allowed them to test the efficiency, robustness, scalability, and
portability with the use of containers compared to previous work in the literature.
In [86], the authors propose a heuristic solution to reduce the delay in video streams with
DASH. To address the problem, they propose a centralized system, where a master server
manages the requests between data servers in the cloud. The solution is implemented in a
cloud system using Docker. The master server processes metrics (free memory, CPU usage,
network status, etc.) from the data servers to manage transcoding requests. The proposed
scheduling algorithm depends on the network state and computational load, and it can request
transcoding processes or search for the transcoding sequence in the data servers with higher
availability. According to the authors, this proposal improves by 30% the video visualization
process for a FIFO type request scheduling.
Finally, the proposal designed in [87] presents an architecture that predicts the optimal
virtual resources for live video transcoding in the cloud. Transcoding tasks are performed
using Docker containers running on a Kubernetes platform. In this research, the authors have
designed several models to predict transcoding speed and CPU consumption on resources.
This implementation has been performed on virtual machines managed by the Eucalyptus
cloud computing environment. They use nodes with FFmpeg for video transcoding and the
statistics of each process are stored in Cassandra. Then, Prometheus software is in charge of
collecting statistics on the resources used by these nodes. This information allows them to
periodically train a predictive model based on the stored transcoding and CPU consumption
measurements. The transcoding nodes act as workers in the Kubernetes cluster. The developed prototype experimented with various learning configurations. The results indicate that
Random Forest (RF) regression achieved the best overall prediction performance compared
to Reinforcement Learning (RL) or Stochastic Gradient Descend (SGD) regression in this
particular case.

4.4 Encoding proposals based on the delivery
4.4.1 Edge computing
In edge computing, data processing, and storage are performed at the edge of the network,
closer to the user [88]. It is often used in applications that require real-time processing, such as
video streaming, autonomous vehicles, and industrial IoT (Internet of Things) applications.
When edge computing architectures are used in video encoding systems, they permit to
processing and transmission of video data efficiently from devices (such as cameras, sensors,
and drones) to the cloud or other remote servers. This allows having lower latency, less
network congestion, and better scalability and security.

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81263

The authors of [89] propose an optimization solution for video transcoding, caching, and
bandwidth costs in adaptive streaming. They focus on orchestrating multiple resources in the
video processing cloud to reduce the cost of adaptive low-demand video streaming. Their
system architecture consists of three parties: content providers, users, and Media Cloud service providers. The optimization problem considers a three-way tradeoff between caching,
transcoding, and bandwidth costs at each edge server. They designed models to manage the
number of video segment representations and optimize the caching of frequently used segments on edge servers. The cost model developed shows that their solution is most effective
for nodes far from the origin server or when bandwidth costs are relatively expensive. Performance tests indicate that the analytical results closely match the experimental results and that
there is a clear trade-off between transcoding and bandwidth costs. Increasing cache space
linearly increases storage costs but decreases combined bandwidth and transcoding cost.
They report up to 50% savings in operating costs of adaptive video-on-demand transmission
compared to the base case and existing methods.
The contribution [90] presents a new approach to video content encoding and distribution by using pro-active caching and collaborative processing of video fragments in edge
networks. In the proposed model, the network will not fetch all segments when a video is
requested, but pro-actively fetch probabilistically selected segments based on their popularity. This probabilistic fragment display model is used to minimize delay and increase QoE,
due to the large bounce rates that a video may have. In addition, it avoids delivering a large
amount of unviewed content to CDNs. Two policies (a Proactive Caching Policy and a Cache
Replacement Policy) are introduced to store only the most popular video fragments in the
cache, which can later be transcoded and distributed from different MEC servers. Simulation
results show that the model and policies perform more than 20% better than other perimeter
caching approaches in terms of cost, average delay, and cache hit ratio for different network
configurations.
In the 5G mobile network context, [91] presents a strategy to deploy virtual CDN instances
dynamically in a federated multi-domain edge cloud for video content delivery. In this case,
the QoE-driven scheme uses automatic scaling to adjust to video transcoding requirements
on the fly by adapting bit rates to network conditions. If quality degradation is detected for
a user based on significant changes in modeled MOS values, a video transcoding service
is triggered to start at the edge cloud. Once the target QoE level is reached, the virtual
transcoder instance can be terminated and removed from the edge node to free up resources.
An Ubuntu 14.04.03 LTS desktop workstation with 8 CPU cores and 16 GB of RAM was used
to evaluate the proposal. The cloud environment was created using OpenStack (DevStack
Juno version) inside an Ubuntu VirtualBox server with 4 dedicated vCPUs and 8 GB of
RAM. The configuration consists of an all-in-one OpenStack environment with the controller,
compute, Heat, and Neutron components running on the same node. The content for the initial
transmission was pre-transcoded and prepared using FFmpeg, and the video codec used was
H.264/AVC. Tests showed that the simulated network conditions led to timely downloads
of video segments to adjust the MOS level. This minimized the playback buffering time,
positively affecting the overall QoE by decreasing the quality adjustment time in transmission.
As we see, several solutions have been implemented to process video content on cloudedge servers. However, they have not considered how to correctly schedule tasks when
they have a high number of requests. For this reason, the paper [92] presents a multirequest scheduling and collaborative service processing method (MRSCP) for DASH in the
cloud edge. The method considers collaborative cache management, request scheduling, and
transcoding. Moreover, neighboring nodes cooperate to process each request through seven
service models; the purpose is to utilize the low latency of edge computing and improve

123

81264

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

the user’s viewing experience. In order to check the proposal, several simulation tests were
executed on a service with DASH, where they had 10 servers and 100 videos. Their results
indicate a caching utilization of 70% compared to 43% and 60% with the SingleEC (no
neighbor nodes) and ColEC (neighbor nodes) methods respectively implemented by the literature.

4.4.2 Content delivery networks
Streaming video over the Internet heavily loads the underlying content delivery networks
(CDNs). Faced with bandwidth and quality of service requirements, more and more video
content providers are turning to content delivery networks. A CDN can help customers to
get video content at a high speed while maintaining high quality in video streams. However,
because video transcoding workloads are high, CDN providers must implement solutions
based on an elastic and optimized cloud.
In paper [93], a transcoding system that leverages cloud computing and content delivery
network infrastructure is designed and implemented. The proposal is called C 3 . It has the following components: a) Ingesting Cloud, which provides fast response and increased capacity
when uploading videos to be transcoded by the client; b) Transcoding Cloud, which manages dynamic provisioning of transcoding nodes to accommodate bursty workloads using an
optimal transcoding node and a client’s profile. These major components are coupled to try
to get the maximum benefit in performance. Requests are served by the GeoDNS component
(standard CDN component), which determines the optimal ingest server to load the content.
After this process, the Transcoding Cloud component is invoked to perform the transcoding. C 3 also has a load balancer to handle job bursts and minimize transcoding time. If a
video exceeds the storage size allowed by an ingestion server, nearby servers will be used for
uploading and processing. The evaluation tests use Microsoft Expression Encoder 4 (EE4)
to encode the videos into multiple representations. The prototype includes 7 ingest servers,
4 transcoding servers, and 6 destination streaming servers located in seven different cities.
They consider a VoD scenario to quantify the savings in several performance metrics. The
first test measures the ingestion performance, where it is shown that by increasing from 1 to
2 servers a 35% reduction of the ingestion time is achieved. However, when using more than
5 servers, the improvement is small. This is due to the overhead of splitting the tasks and
grouping them after being processed.
Finally, another work where the authors show an encoding system based on CDN is
[94]. This paper presents an extensive study on the development of a large-scale transcoding
platform and proposes an architecture to provide CDN Slices as a Service across multiple
management domains in the cloud, intending to optimize the efficient cost incurred in terms
of delivery time and latency. This architecture integrates network functions virtualization
(NFV) technology guided by network management and orchestration (MANO). Specifically
in this work, several virtual network functions (VNFs), such as virtual transmitters and virtual transcoders, running in multi-administrative cloud domains are used. Transcoder servers
are considered virtual network functions that can manage virtual machines instantiated in
different cloud domains. The tests performed using the FFmpeg tool to evaluate the proposal,
the parameters analyzed are: a) Inputs: number of arriving videos and video durations, and b)
Environment: processing capacity of the hosting VM. When transcoding two videos on the
VM-1core, it uses 95% of the total processing resources. However, a VM-1core decreases
almost to less than 50% when transcoding many videos (8 in parallel), i.e. the overall system
latency and response time depend on the virtual resources of the hosting machine. Furthermore, it is observed that the average processing time increases proportionally with the

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81265

duration of the videos, this would allow predicting an estimated transcoding time for the
workloads using machine learning.

4.5 Analysis of the papers according to the video codecs and delivery method
4.5.1 Classification based on video codecs
As we have seen in Section 2.1, several video codecs can be used in multimedia scenarios.
Table 5 shows the video codec used by each work studied in this survey. As we can see,
the most used codec in the proposals is the H.264/AVC codec. The paper that has used
more codecs in its tests is [77], where the authors compare the behaviour of their proposal
using H.265/HEVC, VP9, and AV1, in addition to it is the only one that has used the latest
generation AV1 codec. Another conclusion we can draw from this table is that there are only
3 works that have used the VP9 codec. Many of the papers analyzed do not indicate which
video codec has been used in their proposals, so the table indicates N/A (Not Available).

4.5.2 Classification based on methods of online video delivery
Currently, there are primarily two methods for online video delivery through DASH. VoD
allows users to watch video content like movies or TV shows at their convenience, rather
than adhering to a set broadcast schedule. VoD enables users to watch pre-recorded video
content on their own schedules, often through subscription services or by purchasing or
renting individual titles. Instead, live streaming involves the real-time transmission of video
and audio content over the Internet. Accessible to anyone with an internet connection, live
streams typically broadcast events as they unfold, covering various content such as sports
events, concerts, news broadcasts, and more.
Although both systems have an infrastructure to carry out the tasks of encoding, serving,
streaming, monitoring, etc. live streaming systems have some more strict requirements than
VoD systems, for those reasons in this subsection, we are going to make a classification of
the selected works depending on whether each system is intended to work in VoD, Live, or
not specified. This information is reflected in Table 6.
VoD scenarios can deal with large amounts of multimedia content with loose time constraints, therefore cloud computing and the plethora of managed services they offer is well
suited to deploy this type of streaming service.
If we pay attention to live environments, the proposed solutions must offer encoded content
with an end-to-end delay of less than 15 seconds, which can take advantage of the high
computing capacity and degree of parallelism of the cloud environment combined with edge
computing.

4.6 Relevance of selected papers
In this subsection, we are going to analyze the relevance of each selected paper in this study.
To analyze the relevance of each one, we will rely on the number of citations extracted from
Google Scholar5 .
As we can see in Table 7, the selected papers have been grouped by year of publication. In
the year 2011, only appears one publication, which has 5 references. In the next year, 2012,
5 Google Scholar Website: https://scholar.google.com/

123

81266

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

Table 5 Video codec specified in the model or tests of the studied works
Work

MPEG1/2

H.264/AVC

H.265/
HEVC

VP8

VP9

AV1

EE4

Li et al. [44]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Jokhio et al. [45]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Zheng et al. [46]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A
N/A

Diaz-Sanchez et al. [47]



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Kim et al. [48]



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Kesavaraja and Shenbagavalli [49]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Zakerinasab and Wang [95]

N/A

 /SVC

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Huang et al. [51]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Díaz-Sánchez et al. [52]



 /SVC

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Huang et al. [53]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Jayasena et al. [54]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Kesavaraja and Shenbagavalli [55]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Sameti et al. [56]

N/A

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A
N/A

Barlas [57]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Lin et al. [58]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Wei et al. [59]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Pang et al. [68]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Ranganathan et al. [60]

N/A



N/A

N/A



N/A

N/A

Li et al. [61]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Cheng et al. [62]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Wang et al. [63]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Farhad et al. [64]





N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Wu et al. [66]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A
N/A

Li et al. [67]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Jiang et al. [69]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Zabrovskiy et al. [70]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Lai et al. [71]

N/A

 /SVC

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Ran et al. [72]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Gao and Wen [73]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Hegazy et al. [74]

N/A

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Kim et al. [75]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Gutiérrez-Aguado et al. [76]

N/A

N/A



N/A



N/A

N/A

Gutiérrez-Aguado et al. [77]

N/A

N/A



N/A





N/A

Panarello et al. [78]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Yang et al. [79]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Semsarzadeh et al. [80]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Fouladi et al. [81]

N/A

N/A

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

Ao et al. [82]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81267

Table 5 continued
Work

MPEG1/2

H.264/AVC

H.265/
HEVC

VP8

VP9

AV1

EE4

Gao et al. [83]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Barais et al. [84]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Dong et al. [85]

N/A

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Van Ma et al. [86]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Pääkkönen et al. [87]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Jin et al. [89]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Baccour et al. [90]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Taleb et al. [91]

N/A



N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Zhao et al. [92]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Zhuang and Guo [93]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A



Benkacem [94]

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

there are four papers with 174 references. From the four papers published that year, paper
[44] has 125 references, a high number due to the level of specialization of the topic of this
review. In 2013 were published three papers, which have been referenced by 227 works. In
2014, the same number of papers were published as in 2013, but their impact was lower, as
these papers only obtained 70 references.
In 2015 and 2016, 6 and 8 papers were published, respectively. The number of references
to the papers published in 2015 is 134, while in 2016 it is 119. The publications of 2017 have
obtained the highest number of references (444). [81] with 274 references, is the most referenced paper of this review, doubling its relevance concerning the second most relevant [82],
published in 2018. In that year, 2018, 5 papers were published, which have 174 references.
Finally, six papers were published in 2019 and another six in 2020. The papers of 2019
have 58 references and the papers of 2020 have 36. In 2021 and 2022 only one paper has
been published each year, obtaining 16 references for [60] and 5 for the paper [70]. The total
number of citations of the 49 papers selected for this review exceeds 1460 references. This
is indicative of the importance of the subject for the scientific world. Moreover, with the new
paradigms associated with the cloud and multimedia systems that will be implemented in the
coming years (see next section), these indicators will certainly improve.

Table 6 Classification of works
depending on delivery methods

Type of streaming
VoD (associated to bandwidth)

Works
[44, 47–49, 56, 57, 95],
[58, 61, 63, 67, 70, 73, 75],
[76–78, 83, 84, 86, 89],
[90, 92–94]

Live (associated to delay and jitter)

[45, 51–53, 55, 59, 68],
[60, 62, 64, 66, 69, 74, 79],
[80–82, 87, 91]

Not specified

[46, 54, 71, 72, 85]

123

81268
Table 7 Number of citations per
year

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

Year

Publication

2011

[46]

5

5

2012

[47]

5

174

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

123

Number of
citations

[57]

26

[44]

125

[93]

18

[45]

107

[58]

32

[71]

88

[48]

25

[62]

32

[72]

13

[49]

2

[95]

18

[51]

3

[79]

5

[80]

21

[89]

85

[52]

4

[53]

4

[61]

51

[63]

11

[64]

6

[73]

19

[83]

12

[84]

12

[54]

25

[59]

66

[66]

9

[67]

70

[81]

274

[55]

7

[56]

7

[94]

17

[85]

7

[82]

136

[68]

1

[69]

4

[74]

11

[91]

24

[86]

8

[87]

10

Total cites
by year

227

70

134

119

444

174

58

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278
Table 7 continued

81269

Year

Publication

Number of
citations

Total cites
by year

2020

[75]

4

36

[76]

0

[77]

3

[78]

5

[90]

23

[92]

1

2021

[60]

16

16

2022

[70]

5

5

Total
citations
between 2011-2022

1462

5 Challenges and open research issues
The vast majority of video codecs and cloud/edge architectures are optimized for VoD and
are mainly focused on bandwidth optimization by design. It makes the state of the art with a
significant gap which is directly translated to a big challenge: “to create video codecs with
the possibility to optimize simultaneously for multi-dimensional factors such as latency,
jitter, packet losses, aspect ratio, frame size, etc”. This multi-dimensional challenge can be
materialized in a set of concrete challenges that need to be addressed.
• In the latency domain, it is required to provide ultra-low delay video codecs by design
rather than creating extensions of codecs that have been optimized for frame size and
bandwidth before. There are in the literature available some good attempts such as the
low-latency profiles from all the video codecs analyzed. However, we are referring not to
extensions over the existing video codecs but creating new ones with that target in mind to
achieve the target of the sub 10 ms glass-to-glass latency. It will open the usage of video
in real-time machine-to-machine communications which is currently almost impossible
nowadays, at least with this sub 10ms target.
• In the complexity domain, it is required to provide ultra-simple enconder/decoder by
design to truly allow video processing capabilities in tiny IoT devices (less than 5
EUR/USD/GBP/CNY). The current design of video codec is so complex that certainly
are impossible to be run without the help of hardware acceleration and that hardware
acceleration is currently very complex and expensive to be embedded in IoT chips. As a
consequence, there is not any single true IoT microcontroller, or processor with support
for them. It is important to emphasize that we are referring to true IoT devices defined as
> 1 Watt consumption and not micro-computers such as Raspberry Pi or similar (around
4 Watts currently). By achieving so, we will allow the scaling up of the devices and use
cases provided in the “capture zone” previously described in Fig. 3. It will eventually
open up the usage of video encoding/transmission/decoding in use cases where a low-cost
device is deployed for 10 years of life expectancy and it can transmit video.
• In the power consumption domain, it is required new video codecs truly optimized for
energy consumption, able to send devices to sleep between frames or sets of frames, and
able to perform the computations of the algorithms required to predict the motion of the
video codec while some parts of the microprocessor, board are switched off.

123

81270

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

• In the bandwidth domain, there is yet room for improvement, specially with the new
venue of holopresence and other 360 immersive technologies that require true real-time
experiences. This implies frame resolutions never required before such as 16K or 32K
and frame rates significantly higher than traditional screens such as 100 FPS, 150 FPS,
or 200 FPS, that require high bitrate. Independently of the network conditions, to achieve
an adequate level of QoE with this high volume content, field-of-view aware encoding
must be developed.
• In the jitter domain, there is almost no investigation found in this area. It is going to be a
significant aspect to consider with the venue of the haptics communications where gloves
or other devices can transmit the tactile sense remotely. When it is convenient with video
feeds, the synchronization between video and haptic information is in the range of sub
1ms jitter to do deliver the feeling remotely to the final user. Thus, this is imposing the
need to investigate novel algorithms and architectures to deal with this aspect.
• In the scientific and industrial domain, there is also a significant challenge to be addressed.
The number of channels supported by the video coded. Currently, all the existing video
codecs in the market have been optimized for chroma and luminance and they are all
using different channels focused on the visible spectrum. However, there is a clear need
to investigate video codecs that allow encoding, transmitting, decoding, and managing
multiple channels beyond the visible spectrum such as those coming from the hyperspectral and multispectral imagery where dozens or hundreds of different channels need to
be delivered to create a 3D spectral cube of the sensed information. Thus, this kind of
video codec needs to be dealing with the simultaneous optimization of the quality of the
information delivered and the quality of experience received. This duality imposes a big
challenge that is worth to be investigated and currently is an open research question.
Concerning the architectures of the cloud and edge computing used to deliver video traffic,
we have seen that there are already very good examples of them but it is also true that there
is significant room for improvement in different aspects such as:
• The integration of the novel Edge computing architecture with the optimization for low
latency was previously indicated as a challenge to be able to truly deliver any optimization
in latency achieved by video codec until the last mile of the users.
• The current trend is to provide video transmission protocols that are completely opaque
for the network thus not allowing in-network optimizations. This has been a trend mainly
fostered by the enhancement of privacy and security in video delivery. However, there
is room to create better video transmission protocols that allow exposure to the network
non-privacy or security-sensitive metadata that can be used to perform several video
optimizations along the way, i.e. in the processing, storage, and delivery zones previously
described. Such metadata would allow us to perform smart optimizations in video delivery
by allowing the control plane of the network to be aware of such information.
• The usage of the cloud has also brought a significant challenge that is related to the fact
on the decision on where the encoding of the video is carried out. In Fig. 3, we can
see how the video is captured in the capture zone and sent to the processing zone. The
challenge currently is that there is a complete lack of protocols to efficiently send such
non-encoded raw video to the cloud and such a challenge is even more exacerbated when
we are trying to optimize the use case for dimensions such as latency and jitter.
• Another relevant aspect is multicast, that can relieve packet replication when sending
broadcast traffic to multiple customers. This is simply not supported in any of the current
cloud and edge computing architectures, but if achieved, it could alleviate significantly
the global traffic used for multimedia delivery at planetary scale.

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81271

• The current state of the art in architecture is vastly dominated by the usage of traditional
cloud infrastructure and the novel edge infrastructure but there is a significant lack of
research done in the area of exploiting serverless architectures where the cloud-native
functions for encoding, decoding, and transmission of multimedia are only activated
in an event-driven approach instead of the traditional always-on pay-as-you-go model.
It would significantly produce an alleviation of resources consumed to perform cloud
multimedia operations with significant benefit in terms of both operational and capital
costs of infrastructures and also of development and the power saving associated with
the selective activation of the functions.
• There is also significant room for improvement in the architecture for Video on Demand
in the management of CDNs, which are currently optimized using geo-DNS and similar
approaches to make sure we perform a sub-optimal caching scheme. Network discovery
mechanisms are required in the cloud and edge infrastructures to allow the CDN to have
a complete understanding of the network and thus provide such optimal allocations of
resources to reduce cache missing to virtually 0 percent.
• The cloud/edge architectures are also directly associated with the usage of web browsers
to receive the content. A significant step forward could be achieved by natively empowering web browsers with the streaming protocols of the future. Thus streaming protocols
should be aware not only of the network status but also, of the CDN status, on the network topology, and other aspects to allow the system to predict the intention of the user
concerning the video playback.
• All the video streaming protocols available in the literature are exclusively reactive,
they deliver video but are not aware of the optimizations by the video codecs and thus
cannot optimize such video delivery. For example, performing dynamic GOP negotiation,
dynamic MTU negotiation, and other aspects to fine-tune the video delivery and prevent
network package fragmentation.
• Cloud and edge architectures nowadays are starting to provide basic QoS capabilities.
However, there is no attempt to make video streaming aware of such QoS capabilities.
An open issue is adapting video streaming protocols to send signals directly to the cloud
and edge infrastructure to dynamically take care of QoS requirements according to the
requirements of the video.
• Also, concerning QoS, the cloud and edge computing are starting to investigate the
introduction of novel network slices and being a logically isolated circuit network over
the cloud that allows to enforcement of QoS and SLAs.

6 Discussion and conclusion
6.1 Discussion
In the last few years, video streaming has become increasingly important on the Internet and
the multimedia sector is an elemental aspect in any sector of the business world. Cloud-based
video encoding is a good option for businesses because it is scalable, easy to use, and has low
capital and operational costs. Cloud-based video encoding also offers the flexibility to encode
video using a wide range of codecs and formats. For these reasons and others that have been
discussed throughout this study, this paper makes a thorough review of cloud-based video
encoding and the papers related to this topic.

123

81272

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

While we have identified 49 articles on the topic, we believe that the scientific community
has made relatively few contributions in recent years (2021 and 2022). This is difficult to
explain, particularly considering the numerous challenges outlined in the Section 5 that
warrant improvement in cloud video encoding processes. For instance, when encoding for
multi-resolution transmission of live events with 8K and 16K resolutions, a cloud-based
video encoding system with exceptionally high processing capabilities is essential to attain
low-latency scenarios. This becomes even more critical in real-time systems where glassto-glass times are minimized to sub-second intervals. This difficulty is reflected in the data
obtained, where more than half of the selected works are focused on VoD streaming.
If we focus on the solutions proposed by the scientific community, we observe that the
majority of the works employ the H.264 codec. However, there are very few instances where
the VP9 and AV1 codecs are utilized. Concerning VP9, it is already widely employed in the
industry; for instance, YouTube extensively uses it on its platform. Despite this, the analyzed
works show that few researchers choose to use it. Admittedly, VP9 is a more computationally
complex codec than H.264, but it offers higher compression capabilities. Similar considerations apply to AV1, where the limited adoption is attributed to its implementation occurring
toward the end of 2018. The low variability in codec usage might be considered a weakness
in many of the works reviewed in this analysis.
Another aspect highlighted in the study is the utilization of cloud technologies across different time intervals. Initially, the focus was heavily on the use of Hadoop and MapReduce for
encoding tasks distributed among various workers. Subsequently, the scientific community
shifted towards employing cloud systems, including public clouds such as Amazon AWS or
Microsoft Azure, as well as private clouds-many of which were implemented on OpenStack.
The latest work is focused on architectures where Docker and Kubernetes are used to perform
coding tasks on serverless environments.
Another aspect that has not been addressed in the selected articles is the utilization of the
cloud for coding tasks employing AI techniques. For instance, facilitating real-time generation of metadata from videos, identification of objects, places, and actions, and development of
custom models for classifying and tracking objects in videos. Furthermore, AI can contribute
to video transcoding, detection of inappropriate content, creation of content recommendation engines, and automatic tagging of videos for ad insertion, among other applications. All
these tasks are computationally intensive, and migrating them to the cloud can enhance their
performance.
In summary, there are various review papers on the subject of multimedia cloud computing;
however, none of them specifically delve into the encoding and transcoding processes in
the cloud. These processes demand substantial computational capacity, a requirement met
by migrating to the cloud to mitigate costs. This review paper uniquely focuses on this
specific topic, as there is no comparable work. It addresses a research area marked by novel
enhancements in end-user quality of experience and the optimization of resource consumption
to curtail the expenses associated with these tasks.
Conclusively, upon completing this review, we can effectively address the inquiries outlined in Table 2. The findings indicate a considerable number of works focusing on video
coding within cloud environments. These works have been categorized based on the employed
architecture or paradigm. Additionally, we have discerned the codecs utilized in each study
and determined whether the proposed solutions were tailored for VoD or live environments.
Lastly, we have pinpointed emerging challenges aimed at enhancing encoding systems in
both the cloud and MEC.

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81273

6.2 Conclusion
In this review paper, we have presented the evolution of streaming with a special focus on
the latest streaming methods and the importance of encoding processes. We have analyzed
the importance of cloud systems in multimedia environments and a cloud infrastructure for
media scenarios has been detailed. Moreover, it entails an assessment of previous reviews and
surveys about the subject under consideration. The findings indicate an absence of comparable
scholarly contributions to the one expounded in this paper.
This study has employed the systematic literature review (SLR) technique developed by
Kitchenham and Charters [35]. Through this methodology, we have identified the need for
this review
After that, some information about the selected papers has been introduced. We have also
grouped the works into 3 big groups; according to the type of virtualization technology (VMs
vs. Containers), and delivery on the cloud (see Fig. 8).
Moreover, each paper has been analyzed to detect if its proposal would be appropriate for
live or VoD streaming, and what video codecs were used in the proposals. Lastly, we have
analyzed the relevance of the selected papers according to the received cites. In this study, the
most relevant papers are: [44, 81, 82], and [45] with more than 100 cites each. Finally, this
review concludes presenting challenges and open research issues related to video encoding
on the cloud.
Funding Open Access funding provided thanks to the CRUE-CSIC agreement with Springer Nature. Grant by
PID2021-126209OB-I00 funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by “ERDF A way of making
Europe”, by the “European Union” The research stay abroad of the author Miguel Garcia-Pineda at the
University West of Scotland was funded by the grant BEST/2021/178 - Generalitat Valenciana.

Declarations
Competing interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References
1. Ahrendt D, Cabrita J, Clerici E, Hurley J, Leončikas T, Mascherini M, Riso S, Sándor E (2020) Living,
working and covid-19. Technical report, Eurofound
2. Sandvine (2022) 2022 global internet phenomena report. Technical report, Sandvine. https://www.
sandvine.com/global-internet-phenomena-report-2022
3. Tang H, Liu J, Yan S, Yan R, Li Z, Tang J (2023) M3net: multi-view encoding, matching, and fusion for
few-shot fine-grained action recognition. In: Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on
Multimedia. MM ’23, pp 1719–1728. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, USA. https://
doi.org/10.1145/3581783.3612221
4. Zhu W, Luo C, Wang J, Li S (2011) Multimedia cloud computing. IEEE Sig Process Mag 28(3):59–69.
https://doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2011.940269

123

81274

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

5. He J, Wen Y, Huang J, Wu D (2014) On the cost-qoe tradeoff for cloud-based video streaming under
amazon ec2’s pricing models. IEEE Trans Circuits Syst Video Technol 24(4):669–680. https://doi.org/
10.1109/TCSVT.2013.2283430
6. Attaran M, Woods J (2019) Cloud computing technology: improving small business performance using
the internet. J Small Bus Entrep 31(6):495–519. https://doi.org/10.1080/08276331.2018.1466850
7. Schulzrinne H, Casner S, Frederick R, Jacobson V (2003) RFC 3550: RTP: A transport protocol for
real-time applications. IETF
8. Schulzrinne H, Rao A, Lanphier R, Westerlund M, Stiemerling M (2016) RFC 7826: real-time streaming
protocol version 2.0. IETF
9. Lei X, Jiang X, Wang C: Design and implementation of streaming media processing software based on
rtmp. In: 2012 5th international congress on image and signal processing. pp 192–196 (2012). https://doi.
org/10.1109/CISP.2012.6469981
10. Ruether T (2021) What is webrtc? Technical report
11. Blum N, Lachapelle S, Alvestrand H (2021) Webrtc: real-time communication for the open web platform.
Commun ACM 64(8):50–54
12. Petrangeli S, Pauwels D, Van Der Hooft J, Žiak M, Slowack J, Wauters T, De Turck F (2019) A scalable
webrtc-based framework for remote video collaboration applications. Multimed Tools Appl 78(6):7419–
7452
13. Kua J, Armitage G, Branch P (2017) A survey of rate adaptation techniques for dynamic adaptive streaming
over http. IEEE Commun Surv Tutor 19(3):1842–1866. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2017.2685630
14. Thang TC, Ho Q-D, Kang JW, Pham AT (2012) Adaptive streaming of audiovisual content using mpeg
dash. IEEE Trans Consum Elect 58(1):78–85. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCE.2012.6170058
15. Seufert M, Egger S, Slanina M, Zinner T, Hoßfeld T, Tran-Gia P (2015) A survey on quality of experience
of http adaptive streaming. IEEE Commun Surv Tutor 17(1):469–492. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.
2014.2360940
16. Kalva H (2006) The h.264 video coding standard. IEEE MultiMedia 13(4): 86–90 https://doi.org/10.
1109/MMUL.2006.93
17. Li Z.-N, Drew M.S, Liu J (2014) New Video Coding Standards: H.264 and H.265. Springer, Cham. pp
395–434. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-05290-8_12
18. Mukherjee D, Bankoski J, Grange A, Han J, Koleszar J, Wilkins P, Xu Y, Bultje R (2013) The latest
open-source video codec vp9 - an overview and preliminary results. In: 2013 Picture Coding Symposium
(PCS). pp 390–393 https://doi.org/10.1109/PCS.2013.6737765
19. Han J, Li B, Mukherjee D, Chiang C-H, Grange A, Chen C, Su H, Parker S, Deng S, Joshi U, Chen Y,
Wang Y, Wilkins P, Xu Y, Bankoski J (2021) A technical overview of av1. Proc IEEE 109(9):1435–1462.
https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2021.3058584
20. Chen Y, Murherjee D, Han J, Grange A, Xu Y, Liu Z, Parker S, Chen C, Su H, Joshi U, Chiang C.-H,
Wang Y, Wilkins P, Bankoski J, Trudeau L, Egge N, Valin J.-M, Davies T, Midtskogen S, Norkin A, Rivaz
P (2018) An overview of core coding tools in the av1 video codec. In: 2018 Picture Coding Symposium
(PCS). pp 41– 45 https://doi.org/10.1109/PCS.2018.8456249
21. Bross B, Wang Y-K, Ye Y, Liu S, Chen J, Sullivan GJ, Ohm J-R (2021) Overview of the versatile video
coding (vvc) standard and its applications. IEEE Trans Circuits Syst Video Technol 31(10):3736–3764.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2021.3101953
22. Battista S, Meardi G, Ferrara S, Ciccarelli L, Maurer F, Conti M, Orcioni S (2022) Overview of the
low complexity enhancement video coding (lcevc) standard. IEEE Trans Circuits Syst Video Technol 1.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2022.3182793
23. Grois D, Nguyen T, Marpe D (2016) Coding efficiency comparison of av1/vp9, h.265/mpeg-hevc, and
h.264/mpeg-avc encoders. In: 2016 Picture Coding Symposium (PCS). pp 1–5 https://doi.org/10.1109/
PCS.2016.7906321
24. García-Lucas D, Cebrián-Márquez G, Cuenca P (2020) Rate-distortion/complexity analysis of hevc, vvc
and av1 video codecs. Multimed Tools Appl 79(39):29621–29638. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-02009453-w
25. Al-hammouri M, Madani B, Aloqaily M, Ridhawi I.A, Jararweh Y (2018) Scalable video streaming for
real-time multimedia applications over dds middleware for future internet architecture. In: 2018 IEEE/ACS
15th International Conference on Computer Systems and Applications (AICCSA). pp 1–6 https://doi.org/
10.1109/AICCSA.2018.8612848
26. Escolar AM, Alcaraz-Calero JM, Salva-Garcia P, Bernabe JB, Wang Q (2021) Adaptive network slicing
in multi-tenant 5g iot networks. IEEE Access 9:14048–14069
27. Anton M, Avinash D, Devang S, Murthy P (2021) Production media management: transforming media
workflows by leveraging the cloud. Technical report, Netflix

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81275

28. Xu Y, Mao S (2013) A survey of mobile cloud computing for rich media applications. IEEE Wirel Commun
20(3):46–53. https://doi.org/10.1109/MWC.2013.6549282
29. Wen Y, Zhu X, Rodrigues JJPC, Chen CW (2014) Cloud mobile media: reflections and outlook. IEEE
Trans Multimed 16(4):885–902. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMM.2014.2315596
30. Huang C-T, Qin Z, Kuo C-CJ (2011) Multimedia storage security in cloud computing: an overview. In:
2011 IEEE 13th international workshop on multimedia signal processing. pp 1–6 https://doi.org/10.1109/
MMSP.2011.6093775
31. Yang J, He S, Lin Y, Lv Z (2017) Multimedia cloud transmission and storage system based on internet of
things. Multimed Tools Appl 76(17):17735–17750. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-015-2967-9
32. Tselios C, Tsolis G (2016) A survey on software tools and architectures for deploying multimedia-aware
cloud applications. In: Karydis I, Sioutas S, Triantafillou P, Tsoumakos D (eds.) Algorithmic Aspects of
Cloud Computing. Springer, Cham pp 168–180. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-015-2967-9
33. Toshniwal A, Rathore K.S, Dubey A, Dhasal P, Maheshwari R (2020) Media streaming in cloud with
special reference to amazon web services: a comprehensive review. In: 2020 4th International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Control Systems (ICICCS). pp 368–372 https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICICCS48265.2020.9121097
34. Abdallah M, Griwodz C, Chen K-T, Simon G, Wang P-C, Hsu C-H (2018) Delay-sensitive video computing in the cloud: a survey. ACM Trans Multimed Comput Commun Appl 14(3s). https://doi.org/10.
1145/3212804
35. Kitchenham B, Charters S (2007) Guidelines for performing systematic literature reviews in software
engineering. Technical report. Keele University and Durham University
36. Petersen K, Feldt R, Mujtaba S, Mattsson M: Systematic mapping studies in software engineering. In:
12th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE) 12. pp
1–10 (2008)
37. Banijamali A, Pakanen O-P, Kuvaja P, Oivo M (2020) Software architectures of the convergence of cloud
computing and the internet of things: a systematic literature review. Inf Softw Technol 122:106271. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2020.106271
38. Van Solingen R, Berghout EW (1999) The goal/question/metric method: a practical guide for quality
improvement of software development. McGraw-Hill
39. Van Latum F, Van Solingen R, Oivo M, Hoisl B, Rombach D, Ruhe G (1998) Adopting gqm based
measurement in an industrial environment. IEEE Softw 15(1):78–86. https://doi.org/10.1109/52.646887
40. Petersen K, Feldt R, Mujtaba S, Mattsson M (2008) Systematic Mapping Studies in Software Engineering.
In: Proceedings of the 12th international conference on evaluation and assessment in software engineering.
EASE’08. pp 68–77. BCS Learning & Development Ltd., Swindon, GBR
41. Wohlin C (2014) Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a replication in software
engineering. In: Proceedings of the 18th international conference on evaluation and assessment in software
engineering. EASE ’14. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, USA https://doi.org/10.1145/
2601248.2601268
42. Kitchenham B, Brereton P (2013) A systematic review of systematic review process research in software
engineering. Inf Softw Technol 55(12):2049–2075. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2013.07.010
43. Singh VK (2021) Singh P, Karmakar M, Leta J, Mayr P: The journal coverage of web of science, scopus and
dimensions: a comparative analysis. Scientometrics 126(6):5113–5142. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192021-03948-5
44. Li Z, Huang Y, Liu G, Wang F, Zhang Z.L, Dai Y (2012) Cloud transcoder: bridging the format and
resolution gap between Internet videos and mobile devices. In: Proceedings of the international workshop
on network and operating system support for digital audio and video. pp 33–38. ACM Press, New York,
USA https://doi.org/10.1145/2229087.2229097, http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2229087.2229097
45. Jokhio F, Ashraf A, Lafond S, Porres I, Lilius J: Prediction-based dynamic resource allocation for video
transcoding in cloud computing. In: 2013 21st Euromicro international conference on parallel, distributed,
and network-based processing. IEEE, pp 254–261. (2013) https://doi.org/10.1109/PDP.2013.44, http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6498561/
46. Zheng L, Tian L, Wu Y (2011) A rate control scheme for distributed high performance video encoding
in cloud. In: 2011 International conference on cloud and service computing. IEEE, pp 131–133 https://
doi.org/10.1109/CSC.2011.6138510, http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6138510/
47. Diaz-Sanchez D, Marin-Lopez A, Almenarez F, Sanchez-Guerrero R, Arias P (2012) A distributed
transcoding system for mobile video delivery. In: 2012 5th Joint IFIP Wireless and Mobile Networking Conference (WMNC). IEEE, pp 10–16. https://doi.org/10.1109/WMNC.2012.6416151, http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6416151/

123

81276

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

48. Kim M, Han S, Cui Y, Lee H, Cho H, Hwang S (2014) CloudDMSS: robust Hadoop-based multimedia
streaming service architecture for a cloud computing environment. Clust Comput 17(3):605–628. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10586-014-0381-0
49. Kesavaraja D, Shenbagavalli A (2015) Hadoop scalable video transcoding technique in cloud environment.
In: 2015 IEEE 9th International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Control (ISCO). IEEE, pp 1–6.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCO.2015.7282276, http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7282276/
50. Zakerinasab MR, Wang M (2015) Does chunk size matter in distributed video transcoding? In: 2015
IEEE 23rd International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS). pp 69–70 https://doi.org/10.1109/
IWQoS.2015.7404710
51. Huang J-C, Wu C-Y, Chen J-J (2015) On high efficient cloud video transcoding. In: 2015 International
Symposium on Intelligent Signal Processing and Communication Systems (ISPACS). IEEE. pp 170–173
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISPACS.2015.7432759, http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7432759/
52. Díaz-Sánchez D, Sánchez-Guerrero R, Arias P, Almenarez F, Marín A (2016) A distributed transcoding and content protection system. Telecommun Syst 61(1):59–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11235-0149952-x
53. Huang C-C , Chen J-J, Tsai Y-H (2016) A dynamic and complexity aware cloud scheduling algorithm
for video transcoding. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo Workshops (ICMEW). IEEE, pp 1–6 https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMEW.2016.7574743, http://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/7574743/
54. Jayasena KPN, Li L, Xie Q (2017) Multi-modal multimedia big data analyzing architecture and resource
allocation on cloud platform. Neurocomputing 253:135–143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2016.11.
077
55. Kesavaraja D, Shenbagavalli A (2018) Framework for fast and efficient cloud video transcoding system
using intelligent splitter and hadoop MapReduce. Wireless Pers Commun 102(3):2117–2132. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11277-018-5501-3
56. Sameti S, Wang M, Krishnamurthy D (2018) Stride: distributed video transcoding in spark. In: 2018
IEEE 37th International Performance Computing and Communications Conference (IPCCC). IEEE, pp
1–8 https://doi.org/10.1109/PCCC.2018.8711214 . https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8711214/
57. Barlas G (2012) Cluster-based optimized parallel video transcoding. Parallel Comput 38(4–5):226–244.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parco.2012.02.001
58. Lin S, Zhang X, Yu Q, Qi H, Ma S (2013) Parallelizing video transcoding with load balancing on cloud computing. In: 2013 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems
(ISCAS2013). IEEE, pp 2864–2867 https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCAS.2013.6572476, http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/6572476/
59. Wei L, Cai J, Foh CH, He B (2017) QoS-aware resource allocation for video transcoding in clouds. IEEE
Trans Circuits Syst Video Technol 27(1):49–61. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2016.2589621
60. Ranganathan P, Stodolsky D, Calow J, Dorfman J, Guevara M, Smullen IV CW, Kuusela A, Balasubramanian R, Bhatia S, Chauhan P, Cheung A, Chong IS, Dasharathi N, Feng J, Fosco B, Foss S, Gelb B, Gwin
SJ, Hase Y, He D-k, Ho CR, Huffman Jr RW, Indupalli E, Jayaram I, Kongetira P, Kyaw CM, Laursen A, Li
Y, Lou F, Lucke KA, Maaninen JP, Macias R, Mahony M, Munday DA, Muroor S, Penukonda N, PerkinsArgueta E, Persaud D, Ramirez A, Rautio V-M, Ripley Y, Salek A, Sekar S, Sokolov SN, Springer R, Stark
D, Tan M, Wachsler MS, Walton AC, Wickeraad DA, Wijaya A, Wu HK (2021) Warehouse-Scale Video
Acceleration: Co-Design and Deployment in the Wild. In: Proceedings of the 26th ACM international
conference on architectural support for programming languages and operating systems. ASPLOS 2021.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, USA. pp 600–615 https://doi.org/10.1145/3445814.
3446723, https://doi.org/10.1145/3445814.3446723
61. Li X, Salehi M.A, Bayoumi M, Buyya R (2016) CVSS: a cost-efficient and QoS-aware video streaming
using cloud services. In: 2016 16th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid
Computing (CCGrid). CCGRID ’16, IEEE, pp 106–115 https://doi.org/10.1109/CCGrid.2016.49, http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7515677/
62. Cheng R, Wu W, Lou Y, Chen Y (2014) A cloud-based transcoding framework for real-time mobile video
conferencing system. In: 2014 2nd IEEE international conference on mobile cloud computing, services,
and engineering. IEEE, pp 236–245. https://doi.org/10.1109/MobileCloud.2014.31, https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/document/6834967
63. Wang Y, Chen W-T, Wu H, Kokaram A, Schaeffer J (2016) A cloud-based large-scale distributed video
analysis system. In: 2016 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP). IEEE, pp 1499–
1503. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICIP.2016.7532608 . http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7532608/
64. Farhad SM, Bappi MSI, Ghosh A (2016) Dynamic resource provisioning for video transcoding in IaaS
cloud. In: 2016 IEEE 18th International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications; IEEE 14th International Conference on Smart City; IEEE 2nd International Conference on

123

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

81277

Data Science and Systems (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS). IEEE, pp 380–384. https://doi.org/10.1109/HPCCSmartCity-DSS.2016.0061, http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7828402/
65. Cherkasova L, Phaal P (2002) Session-based admission control: a mechanism for peak load management
of commercial web sites. IEEE Trans Comput 51(6):669–685
66. Wu J, Cheng B, Yang Y, Wang M, Chen J (2017) Delay-aware quality optimization in cloud-assisted
video streaming system. ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput. Commun Appl 14(1). https://doi.org/10.1145/
3152116
67. Li X, Salehi MA, Bayoumi M, Tzeng N-F, Buyya R (2018) Cost-efficient and robust on-demand video
transcoding using heterogeneous cloud services. IEEE Trans Parallel Distrib Syst 29(3):556–571. https://
doi.org/10.1109/TPDS.2017.2766069
68. Pang Z, Sun L, Huang T, Wang Z, Yang S (2019) Towards QoS-aware cloud live transcoding: a
deep reinforcement learning approach. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and
Expo (ICME). IEEE, pp 670–675. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICME.2019.00121, https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/8785022/
69. Jiang Q, Lee YC, Zomaya AY (2019) Scalable video transcoding in public clouds. In: 2019 19th
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing (CCGRID). IEEE. pp 70–75
https://doi.org/10.1109/CCGRID.2019.00017, https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8752872/
70. Zabrovskiy A, Agrawal P, Kashansky V, Kersche R, Timmerer C, Prodan R (2022) Fspot: fast and efficient
video encoding workloads over amazon spot instances. Comput Mater Continua 71(3):5677–5697 https://
doi.org/10.32604/cmc.2022.023630
71. Lai C-F, Wang H, Chao H-C, Nan G (2013) A network and device aware QoS approach for cloud-based
mobile streaming. IEEE Trans Multimedia 15(4):747–757. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMM.2013.2240270
72. Ran Y, Shi Y, Yang E, Chen S, Yang J (2014) Dynamic resource allocation for video transcoding with QoS guaranteeing in cloud-based DASH system. In: 2014 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC
Wkshps). IEEE, pp 144–149 https://doi.org/10.1109/GLOCOMW.2014.7063421, http://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/document/7063421/
73. Gao G, Wen Y (2016) Morph: a fast and scalable cloud transcoding system. In: Proceedings of the 24th
ACM international conference on multimedia. MM ’16, Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, USA. pp 1160–1163 https://doi.org/10.1145/2964284.2973792
74. Hegazy M, Diab K, Saeedi M, Ivanovic B, Amer I, Liu Y, Sines G, Hefeeda M (2019) Content-aware
video encoding for cloud gaming. In: Proceedings of the 10th ACM multimedia systems conference.
MMSys ’19, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, USA. pp 60–73 https://doi.org/10.1145/
3304109.3306222
75. Kim H-W, Mu H, Park JH, Sangaiah AK, Jeong Y-S (2020) Video transcoding scheme of multimedia datahiding for multiform resources based on intra-cloud. J Ambient Intell Humaniz Comput 11(5):1809–1819.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12652-019-01279-1
76. Gutiérrez-Aguado J, Peña-Ortiz R, Garcia-Pineda M, Claver JM (2020) A cloud-based distributed architecture to accelerate video encoders. Appl Sci 10(15):5070. https://doi.org/10.3390/app10155070
77. Gutiérrez-Aguado J, Peña-Ortiz R, García-Pineda M, Claver JM (2020) Cloud-based elastic architecture
for distributed video encoding: Evaluating H.265, VP9, and AV1. J Netw Comput Appl 171. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jnca.2020.102782
78. Panarello A, Celesti A, Fazio M, Puliafito A, Villari M (2020) A big video data transcoding service for
social media over federated clouds. Multimed Tools Appl 79(13–14):9037–9061. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11042-019-07786-9
79. Yang M, Cai J, Zhang W, Wen Y, Foh CH (2015) Adaptive configuration of cloud video transcoding. In:
2015 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), vol 2015-July. IEEE, pp 1658–
1661 https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCAS.2015.7168969, https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7168969
80. Semsarzadeh M, Yassine A, Shirmohammadi S (2015) Video encoding acceleration in cloud gaming. IEEE
Trans Circuits Syst Video Technol 25(12):1975–1987. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2015.2452778
81. Fouladi S, Wahby RS, Shacklett B, Balasubramaniam KV, Zeng W, Bhalerao R, Sivaraman A, Porter
G, Winstein K (2017) Encoding, fast and slow: low-latency video processing using thousands of tiny
threads. In: 14th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 17).
pp 363–376
82. Ao L, Izhikevich L, Voelker GM, Porter G (2018) Sprocket: a serverless video processing framework.
In: Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing. SoCC ’18, Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, USA. pp 263–274. https://doi.org/10.1145/3267809.3267815
83. G Gao, Wen Y, Westphal C (2016) Resource provisioning and profit maximization for transcoding in
Information Centric Networking. In: 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops
(INFOCOM WKSHPS). IEEE, pp 97–102. https://doi.org/10.1109/INFCOMW.2016.7562053, http://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7562053/

123

81278

Multimedia Tools and Applications (2024) 83:81231–81278

84. Barais O, Bourcier J, Bromberg Y.-D, Dion C (2016) Towards microservices architecture to transcode
videos in the large at low costs. In: 2016 International Conference on Telecommunications and Multimedia (TEMU). IEEE, pp 1–6 https://doi.org/10.1109/TEMU.2016.7551918, http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/7551918/
85. Dong Y, Zhang X, Zhao Y, Song L (2018) A containerized media cloud for video transcoding service. In:
2018 IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE). IEEE. pp 1–4 https://doi.org/10.
1109/ICCE.2018.8326347, http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8326347/
86. Van Ma L, Park J, Nam J, Jang J, Kim J (2019) An efficient scheduling multimedia transcoding method
for DASH streaming in cloud environment. Clust Comput 22(S1):1043–1053. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10586-017-1259-8
87. Pääkkönen P, Heikkinen A, Aihkisalo T (2019) Online architecture for predicting live video transcoding
resources. J Cloud Comput 8(1):1–24. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13677-019-0132-0
88. Khan WZ, Ahmed E, Hakak S, Yaqoob I, Ahmed A (2019) Edge computing: a survey. Futur Gener
Comput Syst 97:219–235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2019.02.050
89. Jin Y, Wen Y, Westphal C (2015) Optimal transcoding and caching for adaptive streaming in media cloud:
an analytical approach. IEEE Trans Circuits Syst Video Technol 25(12):1914–1925. https://doi.org/10.
1109/TCSVT.2015.2402892
90. Baccour E, Erbad A, Bilal K, Mohamed A, Guizani M (2020) PCCP: Proactive Video Chunks Caching
and Processing in edge networks. Futur Gener Comput Syst 105:44–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.
2019.11.006
91. Taleb T, Frangoudis PA, Benkacem I, Ksentini A (2020) CDN slicing over a multi-domain edge cloud.
IEEE Trans Mob Comput 19(9):2010–2027. https://doi.org/10.1109/TMC.2019.2921712
92. Zhao X, Zhang S, Dou W (2020) Multi-request scheduling and collaborative service processing for
DASH-video optimization in cloud-edge network. In: 2020 IEEE 13th International Conference on Cloud
Computing (CLOUD). IEEE, pp 582–589. https://doi.org/10.1109/CLOUD49709.2020.00087, https://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9284322/
93. Zhuang Z, Guo C (2012) Building cloud-ready video transcoding system for Content Delivery Networks (CDNs). In: 2012 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM). IEEE, pp 2048–2053
https://doi.org/10.1109/GLOCOM.2012.6503417, http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6503417/
94. Benkacem I, Taleb T, Bagaa M, Flinck H (2018) Performance benchmark of transcoding as a virtual
network function in CDN as a service slicing. In: 2018 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), vol. 2018-April. IEEE, pp 1–6 https://doi.org/10.1109/WCNC.2018.8377402,
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8377402/
95. Zakerinasab MR, Wang M (2015) Dependency-aware distributed video transcoding in the cloud. In: 2015
IEEE 40th conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN), vol 26-29-Octo. IEEE. pp 245–252 https://
doi.org/10.1109/LCN.2015.7366317, http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7366317/
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

Authors and Aﬃliations
Wilmer Moina-Rivera1 · Miguel Garcia-Pineda1
Jose M. Alcaraz-Calero2

· Juan Gutiérrez-Aguado1

·

Wilmer Moina-Rivera
wilmoiri@alumni.uv.es
Juan Gutiérrez-Aguado
juan.gutierrez@uv.es
Jose M. Alcaraz-Calero
jose.alcaraz-calero@uws.ac.uk
1

Department of Computer Science, Universitat de València, Avda. de la Universitat, s/n, Burjassot,
46100 Valencia, Spain

2

School of Computing, Engineering and Physical Sciences, University of the West of Scotland, High
St., Paisley PA1 2BE, Scotland, UK

123

